<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>Chapter 2: Email Makes Us Miserable, A World Without Email</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:fdcd3175-275e-4545-9822-dd3618c31f20" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>

  


<link href="../../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html">A World Without Email: Reimagining Work in an Age of Communication Overload
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Cal Newport

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
        

        
          <a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
		<div class="calibre1">
			<h2 class="x03-chapter-number" id="_idParaDest-12"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_35" role="doc-pagebreak" title="35" class="calibre4"></span>Chapter 2</h2>
			<h2 class="x03-chapter-title" id="_idParaDest-13">Email Makes Us Miserable</h2>
			<h3 class="x05-head-a">An Epidemic of Silent Suffering</h3>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">In early 2017, a new French labor law went into effect that attempted to preserve a so-called “right to disconnect.” According to the law, French companies with fifty employees or more are required to negotiate specific policies about email after work hours, with the goal of significantly reducing the time workers spend in their inbox in the evening or over the weekend. Myriam El Khomri, the minister of labor, justified the new law in part as a necessary step to reduce burnout. Regardless of whether or not you believe such business activities should be subject to government regulation, the fact that the French felt the need to pass this law in the first place points to a more universal problem that expands well beyond the borders of a particular country: email is making us miserable.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber29" id="SuperscriptNumber29" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">1</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">We can make this claim more concrete by turning to the relevant <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_36" role="doc-pagebreak" title="36"></span>research literature. In a 2016 paper co-authored by Gloria Mark, whom we met in the last chapter, a research team hooked up forty knowledge workers to wireless heart rate monitors for twelve workdays. They recorded the subjects’ heart rate variability, a common technique for measuring mental stress. They also monitored the workers’ computer use, allowing them to correlate email checks with stress levels. What they found would not surprise the French: “The longer one spends on email in [a given] hour the higher is one’s stress for that hour.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber30" id="SuperscriptNumber30" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">2</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">In a follow-up study conducted in 2019, a team once again led by Mark placed thermal cameras below each subject’s computer monitor, allowing them to measure the telltale heat that blooms across the face indicating psychological distress. They discovered that batching your inbox checks—a commonly suggested “solution” to improving your experience with email—is not necessarily a panacea. In fact, for those who score high in the common personality trait of neuroticism, batching emails actually makes you <i class="calibre2">more</i> stressed (perhaps due to worry about all the urgent messages you’re ignoring). The researchers also found that when stressed, people answer emails faster, but not better—a text analysis program called the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count reveals that these anxious emails are more likely to contain words that express anger.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber31" id="SuperscriptNumber31" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">3</sup></a> “While email use certainly saves people time and effort in communicating,” the authors of the 2016 study conclude, “it also comes at a cost.” Their recommendation? “[We] suggest that organizations make a concerted effort to cut down on email traffic.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber32" id="SuperscriptNumber32" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">4</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Other researchers have found similar connections between email and unhappiness. A different 2019 study, appearing in <i class="calibre2">The International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health</i>, looked at long-term trends in the self-reported health of a group of nearly five thousand Swedish workers. The researchers found that repeated exposure to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_37" role="doc-pagebreak" title="37"></span>“high information and communication technology demands” (translation: a need to be constantly connected) was associated with “suboptimal” health outcomes. This trend persisted even after they adjusted the statistics for many potentially confounding factors, including age, sex, socioeconomic status, health behavior, BMI, job strain, and social support.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber33" id="SuperscriptNumber33" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">5</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Another way to measure the harm caused by email is to see what happens when you reduce its presence. This is exactly what Harvard Business School professor Leslie Perlow explored in an experiment conducted with consultants from Boston Consulting Group. After Perlow introduced a technique called <i class="calibre2">predictable time off (</i>PTO), in which team members were provided set times each week when they could completely disconnect from email and the phone (with the full support of their colleagues), the consultants became markedly happier. Before PTO was introduced, only 27 percent of the consultants reported that they were excited to start work in the morning. After the reduction in communication, this number jumped to over 50 percent. Similarly, the percentage of consultants satisfied with their job jumped from under 50 percent to over 70 percent. Contrary to expectations, this mild reduction in electronic accessibility didn’t make the consultants feel less productive; it instead increased the percentage of those who felt like they were “efficient and effective” by over twenty points.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber34" id="SuperscriptNumber34" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">6</sup></a> As reported in her 2012 book on this research, <i class="calibre2">Sleeping with Your Smartphone</i>, these results, when first encountered, left Perlow puzzled about why a culture of constant connectivity was ever adopted in the first place.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber35" id="SuperscriptNumber35" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">7</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Of course, we don’t really need data to capture something that so many of us feel intuitively. As mentioned in the last chapter, I conducted a survey of over 1,500 of my readers to find out more about their relationship with tools like email. I was surprised by the strong and <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_38" role="doc-pagebreak" title="38"></span>emotionally charged words people used when asked to describe their feelings toward this technology:</p>
			<ul class="calibre7">
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted-first">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ “It’s slow and very <i class="calibre2">frustrating.</i> . . . I often feel like email is impersonal and a waste of time.”</p>
				</li>
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ “I <i class="calibre2">hate</i> that I can never be ‘off.’”</p>
				</li>
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ “It creates <i class="calibre2">anxiety.</i>”</p>
				</li>
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ “I’m <i class="calibre2">frazzled</i>—just keeping up.”</p>
				</li>
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ “With email, I’m a lot more <i class="calibre2">isolated</i> in my workday . . . and I don’t like that.”</p>
				</li>
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ “You get <i class="calibre2">haunted</i> when everything is very busy.”</p>
				</li>
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted-last">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ “I feel an almost uncontrollable need to stop what I’m doing to check email. . . . It makes me very <i class="calibre2">depressed</i>, <i class="calibre2">anxious</i>, and <i class="calibre2">frustrated.</i>”</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="x04-body-text">I suspect that people’s language would be much more neutral if we asked them about other workplace technologies, like, say, their word processor or the coffee maker. There’s something uniquely deranging about digital messaging. The critic John Freeman effectively summarizes our relationship with email when he notes that with it, “we become task-oriented, tetchy, terrible at listening as we try to keep up with the computer.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber36" id="SuperscriptNumber36" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">8</sup></a> Media theorist Douglas Rushkoff is also onto something when he laments: “We compete to process more emails . . . as if more to do on the computer meant something good. . . . Instead of working inside the machine, as we did before, we must <i class="calibre2">become</i> the machine.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber37" id="SuperscriptNumber37" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">9</sup></a> We depend on email, but we also kind of hate it.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">This reality is important for practical reasons. When employees are miserable they perform worse. They’re also more likely, as the French <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_39" role="doc-pagebreak" title="39"></span>labor minister warned, to burn out, leading to increased healthcare costs and expensive employee turnover. Case in point: Leslie Perlow found that predictable time off from email increased the percentage of employees planning to stay at the firm “for the long term” from 40 percent to 58 percent. Miserable employees, in other words, are bad for the bottom line.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">The reality that email makes us unhappy, however, also has an implication that’s more philosophical than pragmatic. McKinsey estimates that there are over 230 million knowledge workers worldwide,<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber38" id="SuperscriptNumber38" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">10</sup></a> which includes, according to the Federal Reserve, more than a third of the US workforce.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber39" id="SuperscriptNumber39" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">11</sup></a> If this massive population is being made miserable by a forced devotion to inboxes and chat channels, then this adds up to a whole lot of global misery! From a utilitarian perspective, this level of suffering cannot be ignored—especially if there’s something we might be able to do to alleviate it.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">The previous chapter was about the impact of the hyperactive hive mind on human productivity. This chapter is more about its impact on the human soul. My goal in the pages ahead is to understand <i class="calibre2">why</i> this workflow makes us so unhappy. As I’ll argue, this reality is not some incidental side effect that can be cured with clever inbox filters or better company norms; it’s instead fundamental to the various ways in which this highly artificial workflow conflicts with how our human brains naturally operate.</p>
			<h3 class="x05-head-a">Email Scrambles Our Ancient Social Drives</h3>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">The Mbendjele BaYaka people are made up of hunter-gatherer tribes scattered through the forests of the Republic of Congo and the Central African Republic. They live in camps called langos, containing, typically, somewhere between ten and sixty individuals. Each nuclear family in the camp lives in its own hut, known as a fuma. The Mbendjele BaYaka <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_40" role="doc-pagebreak" title="40"></span>lack food storage technology, which makes food sharing a crucial activity for tribal survival. As a result, like many previously studied hunter-gatherer tribes, they’re highly cooperative.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">From a scientific perspective, the Mbendjele BaYaka are interesting because they help us understand the social dynamics of hunter-gatherer tribes. These dynamics remain relevant, as we spent the entirety of our history before the Neolithic Revolution living in such arrangements. We can therefore hope that by studying these tribes (with suitable caution<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber40" id="SuperscriptNumber40" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">12</sup></a>) we might learn something about how our species is hardwired through evolutionary pressures to interact with one another. And by doing so, we might perhaps improve our understanding of why our modern inboxes stress out our ancient minds.</p>
			<hr class="transition"/>
			<div aria-hidden="true" class="x04-space-break-orn">—</div>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">In a 2016 study, published in <i class="calibre2">Nature Scientific Reports</i>, a group of researchers from University College London studied three different Mbendjele BaYaka camps in the Likoula and Sangha regions of the Congo’s Ndoki Forest.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber41" id="SuperscriptNumber41" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">13</sup></a> Their goal was to measure each individual’s “relational wealth,” a technical term for what we might call popularity within the tribe. To do so, they deployed an established technique called the honey stick gift game, in which participants are each given three honey sticks—a highly prized food—and asked to distribute them among other tribe members. By measuring how many honey sticks each participant ends up receiving, the researchers can approximate their relative standing in the tribe.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">They discovered striking differences in how this relational wealth was distributed, with some tribe members receiving many more honey sticks than others. More important, these differences correlated strongly with factors such as body mass index and female fertility, which, in a hunter-gatherer tribe, play a major role in determining whether you <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_41" role="doc-pagebreak" title="41"></span>succeed in passing your genes to the next generation. Many prior studies have documented what the researchers call “psychological and physiological reinforcement mechanisms encouraging the formation and maintenance of social relationships.” This work helps explain why these mechanisms evolved in the first place: in the types of social settings that defined our Paleolithic past, being popular increased the chance your lineage survived.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">A natural next step is to ask <i class="calibre2">how</i> someone becomes popular in a hunter-gatherer tribe. A follow-up study of the Mbendjele BaYaka, published in 2017 in the same journal, provides some insight into this question.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber42" id="SuperscriptNumber42" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">14</sup></a> In this work, the researchers persuaded 132 adults in a BaYaka camp to wear small wireless sensors around their necks for a week. These devices captured and logged one-on-one interactions between subjects, deploying short-range signals every two minutes to record who was near who.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">The researchers then used these voluminous logs of interactions to create what’s known as a <i class="calibre2">social graph.</i> The process here is straightforward. Imagine that you start with a large blank sheet of paper, pinned to a wall. You first draw a circle for every subject who wore a sensor, scattering them evenly across the page. Now, for every interaction event in your log, you draw a line between the circles that represents the two subjects interacting. If a line between them already exists, you can thicken it slightly. When you’re done processing all the interactions, you’re left with a spaghetti pile mess of lines of varying thickness connecting the circles on the paper. Some circles, like busy transit hubs, emanate thick lines in all directions, while others are only sparsely connected; some collections of circles may have very few lines between them, while others are deeply interconnected.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">To a normal human observer, these social graphs seem like a <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_42" role="doc-pagebreak" title="42"></span>complicated jumble. But to scientists in the burgeoning academic field that has become known as network science, these graphs, once coded into digital bits and fed into computers to be analyzed by algorithms, can provide deep insight into the social dynamics of the groups they describe. Which is exactly why the authors of the 2017 research paper went through the trouble of persuading the Mbendjele BaYaka to wear wireless sensors.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">They found that by studying the social graph generated by these logs, they could accurately predict the number of living offspring of the BaYaka mothers involved in the study. The more robust<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber43" id="SuperscriptNumber43" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">15</sup></a> their connection into the network, the higher their reproductive success. As learned in the previous study, in a hunter-gatherer tribe, popularity makes a difference in genetic fitness—more popular tribe members got more food and support, making them healthier and therefore more likely to have healthy children. The new study found that this popularity was captured by the record of one-on-one conversations: those who managed these direct interactions properly thrived, while those who didn’t struggled to pass on their genes.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">One-on-one conversations are <i class="calibre2">crucial</i> to the Mbendjele BaYaka. It is therefore a small leap of evolution-inspired theorizing to expect that we are all hardwired to treat such socializing with great psychological urgency—if you neglect interactions with those around you, they’ll give their metaphorical honey sticks to someone else. This leap seems small in part because it describes something we already so clearly feel. The drive to interact with others is one of the strongest motivational forces humans experience. Indeed, as the psychologist Matthew Lieberman explains in his 2013 book, <i class="calibre2">Social: Why Our Brains Are Wired to Connect</i>, the social networks in our brains are connected to our pain systems, creating the intense heartbreak we feel when someone close to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_43" role="doc-pagebreak" title="43"></span>us dies, or the total desolation we experience when isolated from human interaction for too much time. “These social adaptations are central to making us the most successful species on earth,” Lieberman writes.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber44" id="SuperscriptNumber44" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">16</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Long before scientists probed the underlying structures of our sociality, we were already quite aware and reflective about our crushing need to properly manage interactions. The Torah explicitly forbids rechilut <i class="calibre2">(</i>gossip): “Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people; neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor: I am the LORD,”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber45" id="SuperscriptNumber45" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">17</sup></a> a biblical recognition of the power latent in the information moving through a group’s social graph. Shakespeare also identified friendship as central to the human experience when he wrote Richard II’s famous lament: “I live with bread like you, feel want, / Taste grief, <i class="calibre2">need friends</i>: subjected thus, / How can you say to me, I am a king?”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber46" id="SuperscriptNumber46" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">18</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Which brings us back to email. The flip side of a deep evolutionary obsession with one-on-one interaction, as with most hardwired drives, is a corresponding feeling of distress when it’s thwarted. Much in the same way our attraction to food is coupled with the gnawing sensation of hunger in its absence, our instinct to connect is accompanied by an anxious unease when we neglect these interactions. This matters in the office because, as we’ve documented, an unfortunate side effect of the hyperactive hive mind workflow is that it constantly exposes you to exactly this form of distress. This frenetic approach to professional collaboration generates messages faster than you can keep up—you finish one response only to find three more have arrived in the interim—and while you’re at home at night, or over the weekend, or on vacation, you cannot escape the awareness that the missives in your inbox are piling ever thicker in your absence. Not surprisingly, reports of these forms of stress were common in the responses to my reader survey:</p>
			<ul class="calibre7">
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted-first">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_44" role="doc-pagebreak" title="44"></span>“I have a constant sense of having missed something.”</p>
				</li>
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ “Psychologically, I can’t leave emails unread, no matter how insignificant.”</p>
				</li>
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ “I feel like things are piling up, and then I’m becoming stressed.”</p>
				</li>
				<li class="x07-list-bulleted-last">
					<p class="x07-list-bulleted-first1">☐ “My inbox stresses me out because I know how much effort it takes to PROPERLY communicate via email.”</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="x04-body-text">At this point, however, you might complain that there’s a big difference between neglecting an email and neglecting a fellow hunter-gatherer tribe member. The worst-case consequence of the former is that you might annoy Bob in accounting, while the worst case for the latter is that you starve to death. In fact, your company might even have crystal clear norms about how long it is acceptable to wait before responding to email, meaning that Bob is probably absolutely fine with your delayed reply. The problem, of course, is that deeply embedded human drives are not known for responding to rationality.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">When you skip a meal, telling your rumbling stomach that food is coming later in the day, and therefore it has no reason to fear starvation, doesn’t alleviate the powerful sensation of hunger. Similarly, explaining to your brain that the neglected interactions in your overfilled inbox have little to do with your survival doesn’t seem to prevent a corresponding sense of background anxiety. To your entrenched social circuitry, evolved over millennia of food shortages mitigated through strategic alliances, these unanswered messages become the psychological equivalent of ignoring a tribe member who might later prove key to surviving the next drought. From this perspective, the crowded email inbox is not just frustrating—it’s a matter of life or death.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">We can actually measure this triumph of the ancient social drives over the rational modern brain in the laboratory. In one particularly <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_45" role="doc-pagebreak" title="45"></span>devious study, published in 2015 in <i class="calibre2">The Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication</i>, researchers figured out how to discreetly assess our psychological response to thwarted digital connection.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber47" id="SuperscriptNumber47" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">19</sup></a> Subjects were brought into a room to work on word puzzles. They were told that as part of the experiment, the researcher also wanted to test out a wireless blood pressure monitor. After the subject worked on the puzzle for a few minutes, the researcher returned to the room and explained that the subject’s smartphone was creating “interference” with the wireless signal, so they needed to move the phone to a table twelve feet away—still within earshot, but out of reach. After the subject worked on the puzzle for a few more minutes, the researcher covertly called the subject’s phone. At this point, the subject was trying to solve the word puzzle while hearing their phone ringing from across the room, but was prevented from answering it due to a previous warning from the researcher that it was important not to get up “for any reason.”</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Throughout this entire charade, the wireless monitor was tracking the subject’s physiological state by measuring blood pressure and heart rate, allowing the researchers to observe the effect of the phone separation. The results were predictable. During the period when the phone was ringing across the room, indicators of stress and anxiety jumped higher. Similarly, self-reported stress rose and self-reported pleasantness fell. Performance on the word puzzle also decreased during the period of unanswered ringing.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Rationally speaking, the subjects knew that missing a call was not a crisis, as people miss calls all the time, and they were clearly engaged in something more important in the moment. Indeed, in many cases, the subject’s phone had already been set to Do Not Disturb mode, which the researchers surreptitiously turned off as they moved the phone across the room. This means that the subjects had already <i class="calibre2">planned</i> on missing any calls or messages that arrived during the experiment. But <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_46" role="doc-pagebreak" title="46"></span>this rational understanding was no match for the underlying evolutionary pressures which ingrain the idea that ignoring a potential connection is <i class="calibre2">really bad</i>! The subjects were bathed in anxiety, even though their rational minds, if asked, would admit that there was nothing going on in that laboratory that was actually worth worrying about.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">The missed connections that necessarily accompany the hyperactive hive mind sound these same Paleolithic alarm bells—regardless of our best attempts to convince ourselves that this unanswered communication isn’t critical. This effect is so strong that when Arianna Huffington’s company Thrive Global explored how to free its employees from this anxiety while on vacation (when the knowledge of piling messages becomes particularly acute), it ended up deploying an extreme solution known as Thrive Away: if you send an email to a colleague who’s on vacation, you receive a note informing you that your message has been automatically deleted—you can resend it when they return.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">In theory, a simple vacation autoresponder should be sufficient—as it tells people sending you a message not to expect a reply until you return—but logic is subservient in this situation. No matter what the expectations, the awareness that there are messages waiting for you somewhere triggers anxiety, ruining the potential relaxation of your time off. The only cure is to prevent the messages from arriving altogether. “The key is not just that the tool is creating a wall between you and your email,” explained Huffington. “It’s that it frees you from the mounting anxiety of having a mounting pile of emails waiting for you on your return—the stress of which mitigates the benefits of disconnecting in the first place.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber48" id="SuperscriptNumber48" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">20</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">A tool like Thrive Away might temporarily alleviate the social stress of the hyperactive hive mind, but we cannot ignore the fifty or so weeks a year when we’re not on vacation. As long as we remain committed to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_47" role="doc-pagebreak" title="47"></span>a workflow based on constant, ad hoc messaging, our Paleolithic brain will remain in a state of low-grade anxiety.</p>
			<h3 class="x05-head-a">Email Communication Is Frustratingly Ineffective</h3>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">The wild olive baboons of the Mpala Research Centre in Kenya, like most types of baboons, live in highly social troops that remain remarkably stable even as they travel long distances each day in search of forage. For the scientists who study these animals, a key question is figuring out how they reach a consensus on which direction to move. Answering this question is complicated because these troops can grow as large as one hundred individuals, and deducing how they make their movement decisions would require the simultaneous observation of most of them—a challenge described by a well-known researcher in this field as one of “daunting dimensions.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber49" id="SuperscriptNumber49" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">21</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Not long ago, however, an international group of biologists, anthropologists, and zoologists, led by Ariana Strandburg-Peshkin of Princeton University, set out to overcome these obstacles.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber50" id="SuperscriptNumber50" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">22</sup></a> Their secret weapon: high-resolution, custom-designed GPS collars that record precise locations at a rate of one per second. The team was able to get the collars on close to 85 percent of the animals in the population, yielding a detailed look at the exact movements of the troop throughout the day. Armed with advanced data-mining algorithms and statistical analysis, the researchers were able to extract the process by which these baboons seem to make their decisions about which direction to move—a process, it turns out, that’s fundamentally spatial.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">When preparing to migrate, the baboons in the troop carefully watch one another’s movements, looking in particular for <i class="calibre2">initiators</i> who begin to head away from the group in some fixed direction. How they <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_48" role="doc-pagebreak" title="48"></span>respond to these initiators depends a lot on how they’re arranged in space. If the angle between two initiators is more than ninety degrees, meaning they are leaving the group in quite different directions, then the remaining baboons will commit their loyalty to one, reinforcing that proposal. On the other hand, if two initiators head off in similar directions, the remaining baboons will tend to compromise by committing to a direction that’s somewhere in between. If too many initiators are active at the same time, the remaining baboons are more likely to stay where they are, slowing down the decision-making process until the options converge. Once a given initiator attracts enough followers, the whole troop will follow.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">To apply these ideas to the problems of email, let’s shift our attention from wild olive baboons to their close primate cousins: us. Instead of studying how baboons decide which direction to forage in the forests of Kenya, consider instead a scenario in which a team of knowledge workers is evaluating business plans. In shifting from the forest to the office, we’ve also shifted the decision-making process from one embodied in the physical world to one that’s likely purely writing-based, as most such decisions unfold through electronic messaging in the era of the hyperactive hive mind.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Before we applaud our modern approach as superior, however, it should give us some pause to remember that written language is at most only five thousand years old,<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber51" id="SuperscriptNumber51" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">23</sup></a> which is minuscule with respect to evolutionary timescales. The ancient collaboration processes etched into our neural circuits over millions of years of evolution, and hinted at by the behaviors of our primate cousins, must still be present, and presumably expecting something quite different from our interactions than simply exchanging written words over computer screens. This mismatch between how we’re wired to communicate and how we’re coerced into <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_49" role="doc-pagebreak" title="49"></span>communicating by modern technology creates a deeply human sense of frustration.</p>
			<hr class="transition"/>
			<div aria-hidden="true" class="x04-space-break-orn">—</div>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">Around the same time that researchers were fitting GPS collars to baboons, an MIT professor named Alex Pentland was fitting an even more sophisticated package of sensors to a group of business executives gathered around a conference table on MIT’s campus. These sensors, called sociometers, are roughly the size of a deck of cards and are worn around the neck. They include an accelerometer to track the subject’s movement, a microphone to record their speech, a wireless Bluetooth chip to determine who is nearby, and finally, an infrared sensor to detect whether or not the subject is looking another subject in the face while interacting.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber52" id="SuperscriptNumber52" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">24</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">The executives would each present a business plan to the group. Their goal was to then work together to agree on which plan was best. A standard technique to study such collaboration is to transcribe all the words that are spoken, but the reason why Pentland went through the trouble of outfitting the subjects with advanced sensors is that he had become convinced that this <i class="calibre2">linguistic</i> channel of information captured only a small part of what would be important for understanding the interaction underway in that conference room. Flowing concurrently alongside the words being said was an unconscious social channel, made up of subtle physical cues in body language and voice tone that painted a richer picture of how decisions were being reached in that room. These “ancient primate signaling mechanisms” had been previously studied in apes, but Pentland’s sociometers were designed to prove that these mechanisms still play a major role in human collaboration.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber53" id="SuperscriptNumber53" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">25</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">There are many signals that work on this social channel. As Pentland <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_50" role="doc-pagebreak" title="50"></span>explains in his book on the topic, <i class="calibre2">Honest Signals: How They Shape Our World</i>, this information is processed largely unconsciously, often using lower-level circuits in our nervous system, which is why it evades our perceived experience. Its impact, however, shouldn’t be underestimated. “These social signals are not just a back channel or complement to our conscious language,” Pentland writes. “They form a separate communication network that powerfully influences our behavior.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber54" id="SuperscriptNumber54" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">26</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">One such signal delivered through this unconscious network is called, aptly enough, <i class="calibre2">influence.</i> It describes the degree to which one person can cause another to match their speaking pattern. This information, which is processed in our brain through subcortical structures centered on the tectum, provides a fast and accurate snapshot of power dynamics in a given room. Another such signal is <i class="calibre2">activity</i>, which describes a person’s physical movements during a conversation. Shifting in your seat, leaning forward, demonstrative gesticulating—these behaviors, which are mediated largely through the autonomic nervous system (“an extremely old neural structure”), provide a surprisingly accurate reading of the true intentions of an individual in the interaction.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber55" id="SuperscriptNumber55" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">27</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">We know these signals are important because, as Pentland demonstrates in his research, by measuring them using his sociometers he can accurately predict outcomes of face-to-face scenarios such as dating, salary negotiations, and job interviews without any reference to the actual words spoken. Indeed, returning to the study of the business executives in the MIT conference room, Pentland later presented written versions of the plans to a new group and asked each group member to decide on their own which was best. Their decisions were significantly different from those reached by the group that heard the pitches in person. “The executives [in the group setting] thought they were evaluating the plans based on rational measures,” Pentland explains, “[but] another part of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_51" role="doc-pagebreak" title="51"></span>their brain was registering other crucial information, such as: How much does this person believe in this idea? How confident are they when speaking? How determined are they to make it work?”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber56" id="SuperscriptNumber56" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">28</sup></a> The executives who simply read the plans didn’t realize how much they were missing. Both groups reviewed the same pitches, but they were working with vastly different information.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">When we shifted toward the hyperactive hive mind workflow in the 1990s and early 2000s, we believed we were just taking the conversations that were happening in conference rooms and on phone lines and shifting them onto a new messaging medium, leaving the content of these interactions largely unchanged. As research like Alex Pentland’s emphasizes, however, this prioritization of abstract written communication over in-person communication disregarded the immensely complex and finely tuned social circuits that our species evolved to optimize our ability to work cooperatively. By embracing email, we inadvertently crippled the systems that make us so good at working together. “Memos and emails simply don’t work the same way that face-to-face communications work,” Pentland bluntly concludes.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber57" id="SuperscriptNumber57" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">29</sup></a> It’s no wonder that our inboxes so often leave us with an unspecified and gnawing sense of annoyance.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">This annoyance is heightened by the fact that we often overestimate our correspondents’ ability to understand our messages. In a now classic experiment that appeared in her 1990 doctoral dissertation, a Stanford psychology student named Elizabeth Newton paired up research subjects, who sat across from each other at a table. She asked one person to tap out a well-known song using their knuckles on the table, while the other subject had to guess the song. The tappers estimated that about 50 percent of the listeners would figure out the song. In reality, fewer than 3 percent succeeded in naming the rhythmic tune.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber58" id="SuperscriptNumber58" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">30</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">As Newton argued, when the tapper is knocking on the table, they <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_52" role="doc-pagebreak" title="52"></span>hear in their head all the accompaniment for the song—the singing, the instruments—and have a hard time putting themselves into the mental state of the listener, who has access to none of that information and is instead left grappling with a puzzling jumble of sporadic knocks. Social psychologists call this effect <i class="calibre2">egocentrism</i>, and as a research team led by Justin Kruger of NYU set out to demonstrate in a surprisingly entertaining 2005 paper, appearing in <i class="calibre2">The Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</i>, it plays a big role in explaining why email drives us crazy.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber59" id="SuperscriptNumber59" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">31</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Kruger and his collaborators started by studying sarcasm. In their first experiment, they gave a group of participants a list of topics. For each topic, they were asked to write two sentences: one normal and one sarcastic. They then emailed their sentences to participants in another group, who were tasked with identifying which sentences were meant to be sarcastic. “As expected, the participants were overconfident,” the paper explains. The sentence writers predicted that the readers would essentially get every choice right. In reality, they failed nearly 20 percent of the time.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">In a follow-up experiment, half the sentence writers got to record themselves reading their sentences on a tape recorder, while the other half still emailed their creations. Perhaps not surprisingly, hearing sentences on a recording made it easier to determine whether or not they were sarcastic. What <i class="calibre2">was</i> surprising was that the sentence writers predicted there would be no difference: they believed the recipients would have an equally easy time detecting sarcasm in written and recorded sentences.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">To test the claim that <i class="calibre2">egocentrism</i> was the source of the participants’ overconfidence, the researchers turned their attention to humor. They now provided each sender with a short humorous passage. In particular, they drew from humorist Jack Handey’s <i class="calibre2">Deep Thoughts</i>: absurdist mini monologues delivered as scrolling text, read by a deadpan narrator <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_53" role="doc-pagebreak" title="53"></span>and set against a relaxing backdrop. These appeared as a regular feature on <i class="calibre2">Saturday Night Live</i> during the 1990s and early 2000s. To make this experiment more concrete (and to provide me an excuse to replicate the funniest passage I’ve ever read in a peer-reviewed article), here’s an example <i class="calibre2">Deep Thought</i> that was actually used by the researchers:</p>
			<blockquote class="calibre6">
				<p class="x06-extract-1p">I guess of all my uncles, I liked Uncle Caveman the best. We called him Uncle Caveman because he lived in a cave, and because sometimes he’d eat one of us. Later on we found out he was a bear.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="x04-body-text">To test egocentrism, the researchers randomly divided the senders into two groups. Each participant in the first group was simply provided a <i class="calibre2">Deep Thought</i> to send via email. Those in the second group were shown a clip of the thought being delivered on <i class="calibre2">Saturday Night Live</i>, with the oh-so-perfect calming music, the deadpan narrator, and the shocked laughter from the audience. After watching the clip, this group also emailed just the text. In both cases, the senders were asked how funny they thought the passage was and to estimate how funny the recipients would find it.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">“Participants in the videotape condition thought that the [<i class="calibre2">Deep </i><i class="calibre2">Thoughts</i>] were funnier than did participants in the control condition,” the paper reveals, “and the same was true of participants’ predictions of the recipients’ evaluation of the jokes.” Seeing the video clip provided the minds of the participants with a richer accompaniment to play alongside the text they were typing into the email. Like Elizabeth Newton’s song tappers hearing the music in their head, the videotape group couldn’t shake the funny visuals and laughing crowd when trying to judge how well their email would be understood. The richer the sender’s subjective experience of what she’s trying to communicate, the bigger the gap grows <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_54" role="doc-pagebreak" title="54"></span>between her understanding and that of her correspondent—evidence that egocentrism is at the core of the measured overconfidence.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">The conclusion of this work is that emails are commonly misunderstood because of the “inherent difficulty of moving beyond one’s subjective experience of a stimulus and imagining how the stimulus might be evaluated by someone who does not share one’s privileged perspective.” To make matters even worse, the researchers found that the recipients of these ambiguous messages were as overconfident as the senders. They were confident that they were correctly detecting sarcasm or identifying humor, even when they weren’t doing well at all. This last observation applies a particularly devious twist to our understanding of email’s many confusions. It’s not just that we’re less clear than we think, but we’re often completely misunderstood. You were <i class="calibre2">sure</i> that you were sending a nice note, while your receiver is equally <i class="calibre2">sure</i> you were delivering a pointed critique. When you build an entire workflow on exactly this type of ambiguous and misunderstood communication—a workflow that bypasses all the rich, non-linguistic social tools that researchers like Alex Pentland documented as being fundamental to successful human interaction—you shouldn’t be surprised that work messaging is making us miserable.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">We don’t need research studies, however, to emphasize something that many of us already experience on a daily basis. In her book <i class="calibre2">Reclaiming Conversation</i>, MIT social scientist Sherry Turkle catalogs stories of the issues caused when workplaces shift more of their interaction to written text. One such case study focuses on the trials of a technology director named Victor, who manages a team at a large financial services firm. “Typically, things get into trouble when too much has been done by email,” Victor tells Turkle. He keeps having to convince his team that when problems arise with a client, they need to talk to them in person. “This is not something they would come to themselves,” he <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_55" role="doc-pagebreak" title="55"></span>explains. “I’m usually facing someone who wants to send twenty-nine emails to fix a problem.” His solution is simpler: “Go talk to them.” As Victor elaborates, his younger colleagues see electronic communication as a “universal language” that provides a more efficient way to interact. Increasingly, Victor sees his role as convincing them that this couldn’t be further from the truth: email is not a universal form of interaction, he keeps trying to explain; it is instead an impoverished simulacrum of the types of complex and nuanced behaviors that through most of human history defined our communication. We all increasingly feel the effects of this mismatch.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber60" id="SuperscriptNumber60" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">32</sup></a></p>
			<h3 class="x05-head-a">Email Creates More Work</h3>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">In 2012, a research team led by Gloria Mark published one of my favorite studies on the impact of email.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber61" id="SuperscriptNumber61" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">33</sup></a> Their experiment was brilliant in its simplicity: they selected thirteen employees at a large scientific research firm and had them stop using email for five workdays. The researchers didn’t make elaborate contingency plans or develop alternative workflows in advance of the experiment: they simply shut down the subjects’ email addresses and sat back to watch what happened.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Though the study includes many interesting results, I want to focus on an observation that was not reported in the published paper but was instead brought to my attention more recently in a conversation with Gloria Mark. As she explained to me, one of the subjects was a research scientist who needed to spend around two hours each day setting up a laboratory for an experiment. He reported that he was frequently frustrated because his boss had the habit of sending him emails during this preparation period, asking him questions or delegating work. This required the scientist to stop what he was doing to attend to his boss’s wishes—significantly slowing down the lab setup. The reason Mark <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_56" role="doc-pagebreak" title="56"></span>remembers this scientist’s plight was because during the five days when he was without email, his boss stopped bothering him during his lab setup. What makes this observation remarkable is that the boss’s office was only <i class="calibre2">two doors</i> down the hall. The small amount of extra difficulty required to walk a few steps and poke his head through the door was enough to prevent the boss from handing off extra work to the scientist. “He was thrilled,” Mark remembers.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">This vignette of the frustrated scientist and his distracting boss underscores an important cost of email that we often miss. Tools like email almost completely eliminate the effort required—in terms of both time and social capital—to ask a question or delegate a task. Viewed objectively, this seems like a good thing: less effort equals more efficiency. As I’ll show, however, the side effect of this transformation is that knowledge workers began to ask more questions and delegate more tasks than ever before, leading to a state of perpetual overload that’s driving us toward despair.</p>
			<hr class="transition"/>
			<div aria-hidden="true" class="x04-space-break-orn">—</div>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">One way to examine our changing workloads is to look at the systems we use to keep track of them. As productivity guru David Allen argues in his canonical 2001 bestseller, <i class="calibre2">Getting Things Done</i>, the period in which email spread was defined by significant changes in time management approaches. As late as the 1980s, the “essence of being organized” involved keeping a pocket-sized Day-Timer (a paper calendar) and making a daily to-do list to help figure out how to spend the time in between appointments. Especially organized workers would use prioritization schemes, such as Alan Lakein’s ABC Method or Stephen Covey’s Four Quadrants, to help determine the order in which to complete the handful of tasks they identified as important for the day.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">“The traditional approaches to time management and personal <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_57" role="doc-pagebreak" title="57"></span>organization were useful in their time,” Allen notes. But as the 1980s gave way to the 1990s, the idea that your day could be captured by a short list of coded tasks became quaint. “More and more people’s jobs are made up of dozens or even hundreds of e-mails a day, with no latitude left to ignore a single request, complaint or order,” Allen writes. “There are few people who can . . . maintain some predetermined list of to-dos that the first . . . interruption from their boss won’t totally <i class="calibre2">undo.</i>”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber62" id="SuperscriptNumber62" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">34</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Allen rose to fame within time management circles at the same time that the hyperactive hive mind rose toward ubiquity. He sold over 1.5 million copies of his book in large part because he was one of the first business thinkers to take seriously how much this new workflow was increasing the <i class="calibre2">amount</i> of work dumped on our plates. He told his newly overwhelmed readers that they needed to capture every last one of these obligations into a “trusted system,” where they could be clarified and organized—providing the foundation for a frenetic work style in which you attempt to execute existing items faster than new ones arrive.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Getting-things-done rookies are often shocked by the length of their task lists. As Allen recalls, in his consulting work, he soon found he needed two full uninterrupted days to help executives go through and clarify everything they were supposed to be doing. The process of simply listing tasks for which they were responsible often took “six hours or more.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber63" id="SuperscriptNumber63" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">35</sup></a> Gone are the days of the “productive” executive consulting his Day-Timer, then carefully listing out the six things he hoped to accomplish. In the modern world, knowledge workers now feel under siege by obligations.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">The relevant research literature also helps clarify this sense of overload. In their original 2004 study on attention fragmentation, Victor M. González and Gloria Mark partitioned the efforts of the employees they observed into distinct <i class="calibre2">working spheres</i>, each representing a different <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_58" role="doc-pagebreak" title="58"></span>project or objective. They found that on average their subjects worked on ten different spheres per day, spending less than twelve minutes on one before switching to another.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber64" id="SuperscriptNumber64" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">36</sup></a> A follow-up study in 2005 found the observed employees touching on eleven to twelve different working spheres per day on average.<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber65" id="SuperscriptNumber65" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">37</sup></a> The large number of different spheres these subjects tackled in a given day, combined with the reality that each sphere demands the accomplishment of many smaller tasks and presumably dozens of emails, provides a harried portrayal of modern knowledge work. “At night, I often wake in a panic about all the things I need to do or didn’t get done,” writes journalist Brigid Schulte in <i class="calibre2">Overwhelmed</i>, her 2014 book on this busyness epidemic. “I worry that I’ll face my death and realize that my life got lost in this frantic flotsam of daily stuff.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber66" id="SuperscriptNumber66" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">38</sup></a></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">This brings us back to my original contention that we can blame email—or more accurately, the hyperactive hive mind workflow it enabled—for much of this shift toward overload. One piece of evidence for this claim is timing. This rise in busyness seems to have occurred somewhere between the late 1980s and the early 2000s: the same period when email spread throughout the working world. Another piece of evidence comes from the experts themselves. David Allen and Gloria Mark, among other relevant commentators, specifically connect email with our current state of frenetic activity.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">We can also identify a plausible mechanism that helps explain how email might have increased our workload. I opened this section with the story of the frustrated scientist fending off requests from his boss. When the scientist’s email was temporarily removed, the boss stopped handing off the extra requests, even though his office was only two doors down from the scientist’s laboratory. Simply adding a small amount of <i class="calibre2">friction</i> significantly reduced the requests coming the scientist’s way. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_59" role="doc-pagebreak" title="59"></span>For many knowledge workers, this story probably makes sense—how many of the quick asks for someone else’s time and attention that you dash off over email during a normal day would you still make if you had to instead walk down the hallway and interrupt someone’s work?</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">This effect implies there’s something irrational lurking in this system we use to allocate cognitive resources in the workplace. If slightly increasing friction drastically reduces the requests made on your time and attention, then most of these requests are not vital to your organization’s operation in the first place; they are instead a side effect of the artificially low resistance created by digital communication tools. The idea that eliminating friction can cause problems might sound unusual, as we’re used to thinking about more efficiency producing more effectiveness, but among engineers like me, this concept is commonly understood. Too little friction can lead to feedback loops that spiral out of control, as happens when a microphone gets too close to a speaker and the self-amplification recursively explodes into a deafening screech.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Something like the workload equivalent of the microphone screech is happening in modern knowledge work. When the friction involved in asking someone to do something was removed, the number of these requests spiraled out of control. I frantically try to grab other people’s time and attention to make up for the time and attention they’ve already grabbed from me. Soon everyone is like Brigid Schulte, up late at night, drowning in the “frantic flotsam of daily stuff.”</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">What would happen to this “stuff” if some friction was reintroduced to the system (as in Gloria Mark’s email freedom experiment)? My guess is that a lot of these urgent tasks would simply disappear: the vital question I dashed off in a quick Slack message suddenly becomes less vital when asking it requires me to go interrupt what you’re doing and confront that look of annoyance on your face. I might drop it or <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_60" role="doc-pagebreak" title="60"></span>just handle it myself. Many other tasks would probably get consolidated into more reasonable chunks. What used to unfold over a few dozen ad hoc messages might become a larger discussion at a regular status meeting. This is slightly more annoying in the moment, as you now have to keep track of things you need help with until the next meeting, but everyone ends up much less distracted.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Friction also motivates the development of more intelligent processes. Imagine that I frequently need you to sign a certain type of requisition form. With low-friction communication tools like email, I might simply shoot you copies of the forms to sign whenever I need them, as this gets the responsibility off my plate with minimal effort. Without email, however, the pain of having to come physically find you for every signature will motivate me to develop a better system, such as one where I put these forms in your mailbox on Friday morning and you promise to sign them and have them back to me by Monday morning. This system is much better for you, as it frees you from yet another source of unscheduled requests for your time and attention, but it was unlikely to emerge in a setting where just firing off the forms electronically generated essentially zero cost.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">To summarize, we often overestimate the rational nature of our workloads. If a task is on our plate, we believe, it’s because it’s important—part of the job. But as I’ve just argued, both the type and quantity of the efforts that make up our day can be strongly influenced by less rational factors, such as the relative cost of asks for someone else’s time and attention. When we made communication free, we accidentally triggered a massive increase in our relative workloads. There’s nothing fundamental about these newly increased workloads; they’re instead an unintended side effect—a source of stress and anxiety that we can diminish if we’re willing to step away from the frenetic back-and-forth that defines the hyperactive hive mind workflow.</p>
			<h3 class="x05-head-a"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_61" role="doc-pagebreak" title="61" class="calibre4"></span>Clarifying the Misery Mechanisms</h3>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">Most knowledge workers intuitively feel a sense of unhappiness emanating from their overflowing inboxes. The reason this reality hasn’t catalyzed a revolt, however, is that it’s often portrayed as unavoidable—the sine qua non of work in a hyper-connected, high-tech age. As a 2018 article from the <i class="calibre2">MIT Sloan Management Review</i> explains: “The ‘keep everybody busy’ theory remains alive and well . . . in knowledge work.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber67" id="SuperscriptNumber67" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">39</sup></a> (The article elaborates that the manufacturing sector, by contrast, figured out in the 1980s that relentless busyness was not an optimal way to run things.)</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">In this chapter, I attempted to push back against this generalized fatalism by detailing three specific ways in which the hyperactive hive mind workflow makes us unhappy: the psychological anxiety of an inbox that fills up faster than we can empty it, the frustrating ineffectiveness of text-only communication, and the out-of-control overload that results when friction is eliminated from office interactions. When we isolate these sources of unease, they no longer seem unavoidable; rather, they are unfortunate and largely unexpected clashes between the specific ways we work and the natural operation of our brains. The solution is not to shrug our shoulders, but instead to pursue the obvious fix: replace the hyperactive hive mind with alternative workflows that still get things done, but sidestep the worst of these misery-inducing side effects. A world without email, as we’ll explore in part 2, is largely a happier world. We have one last stop, however, before we begin this discussion of what works better. The challenge we take up in the next and final chapter of part 1 is trying to understand how we ended up wedded to such an unproductive and misery-inducing approach to work in the first <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_62" role="doc-pagebreak" title="62"></span>place.</p>
		</div>
	


  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html">Table of contents
</a></h2>
    <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="02_Also_by_Cal_Newport.xhtml">Also by Cal Newport</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="03_Title_Page.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="04_Copyright.xhtml">Copyright</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="05_Dedication.xhtml">Dedication</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="06_Contents.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="07_Introduction_The_Hype.xhtml">Introduction: The Hyperactive Hive Mind</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="08_Part_1_The_Case_Again.xhtml">Part 1: The Case Against Email</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml">Chapter 1: Email Reduces Productivity</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml">Chapter 2: Email Makes Us Miserable</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml">Chapter 3: Email Has a Mind of Its Own</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="12_Part_2_Principles_for.xhtml">Part 2: Principles for a World Without Email</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml">Chapter 4: The Attention Capital Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml">Chapter 5: The Process Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml">Chapter 6: The Protocol Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml">Chapter 7: The Specialization Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="17_Conclusion_The_Twenty.xhtml">Conclusion: The Twenty-First-Century Moonshot</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="18_Acknowledgments.xhtml">Acknowledgments</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="19_Notes.xhtml">Notes</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="20_Index.xhtml">Index</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="21_About_the_Author.xhtml">About the Author</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
    

    <a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html" class="calibreAHome">start
</a>

    
      <a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
