<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>Conclusion: The Twenty-First-Century Moonshot, A World Without Email</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:fdcd3175-275e-4545-9822-dd3618c31f20" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>

  


<link href="../../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html">A World Without Email: Reimagining Work in an Age of Communication Overload
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Cal Newport

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
        

        
          <a href="18_Acknowledgments.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
		<div class="calibre1">
			<h2 class="x03-chapter-number" id="_idParaDest-26"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_257" role="doc-pagebreak" title="257" class="calibre4"></span>Conclusion</h2>
			<h2 class="x03-chapter-title" id="_idParaDest-27">The Twenty-First-Century Moonshot</h2>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">In 1998, the social critic Neil Postman gave an important speech titled “Five Things We Need to Know about Technological Change.”<a href="19_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber176" id="SuperscriptNumber176" class="calibre3"><sup class="endnote">1</sup></a> He opened by saying that although he didn’t have solutions to all the problems surrounding modern technology, he could share some ideas based on his over thirty years of studying the topic. Each of his ideas is profound. He talked, for example, about the fundamental trade-off inherent in all technological change: “For every advantage a new technology offers, there is always a corresponding disadvantage.” He also argued that these advantages and disadvantages are never “distributed evenly” among the population.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">It’s the fourth of his five ideas, however, that I want to dwell on, as it casts into sharp relief the intellectual framework I’ve attempted to build in this book:</p>
			<blockquote class="calibre6">
				<p class="x06-extract-1p">Technological change is not additive; it is ecological. . . . A new medium does not add something; it changes everything. In the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_258" role="doc-pagebreak" title="258"></span>year 1500, after the printing press was invented, you did not have old Europe plus the printing press. You had a different Europe.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Postman’s idea clarifies the confusing cognitive dissonance so many people feel about digital communication tools like email. Rationally, we know email is a better way to deliver messages than the technologies it superseded: it’s universal, it’s fast, it’s essentially free. For anyone old enough to remember clearing jammed fax machines or struggling to open the red-thread ties of those worn memo folders, there’s no debate that email elegantly solves real problems that once made office life really annoying. At the same time, however, we’re fed up with our inboxes, which seem to be as much a source of stress and overwork as they are a productivity boon. These dual reactions—admiration and detestation—are confusing and leave many knowledge workers in a state of frustrated resignation.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Drawing from Postman, we can gain clarity. The issue is that we tend to think of email as <i class="calibre2">additive</i>; that the office of 2021 is like the office of 1991 plus faster messaging. But this is wrong. Email isn’t additive; it’s <i class="calibre2">ecological.</i> The office of 2021 is not the office of 1991 plus some extra capabilities; it’s instead a different office altogether—one in which work unfolds as a never-ending, ad hoc, unstructured flow of messages, a workflow I named <i class="calibre2">the hyperactive hive mind.</i> We didn’t used to work this way, but today, now thoroughly entangled in the hive mind’s demands, we find ourselves crushed by shallow busyness and struggling to get important work done, all the while feeling increasingly miserable.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Part 1 of this book was my attempt to elaborate this dynamic. In addition to defining the hyperactive hive mind workflow and explaining the various ways in which it diminishes our work lives, I looked closer at the complicated forces that made it ubiquitous (which turn out <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_259" role="doc-pagebreak" title="259"></span>to have a lot to do with management theorist Peter Drucker’s early insistence on knowledge worker autonomy). As I argued: email made the hive mind workflow possible, but it didn’t make it inevitable. We’re not, in other words, stuck working this way. The title of this book, <i class="calibre2">A World Without Email</i>, turns out to be just an approachable shorthand for the more accurate portrayal of my vision: <i class="calibre2">A World Without the Hyperactive Hive Mind Workflow.</i></p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">With this reality established, in part 2 of this book I shifted my attention from the negative aspects of this workflow to the positive opportunities that arise once we recognize that we can replace it. Perhaps the most important observation I made in the second half of the book came in its first chapter, where I noted that the productivity of the average manual laborer increased by more than <i class="calibre2">fifty times</i> between 1900 and 2000. The reason this is important is that near the end of his life, Peter Drucker, the man who coined the term <i class="calibre2">knowledge work</i>, assessed the productivity of knowledge workers to be where manual labor was in 1900. In other words, we haven’t even scratched the surface of how best to operate in this new economic sector. It follows that the potential productivity gains of breaking the stranglehold of the hyperactive hive mind workflow are staggering—on the order of hundreds of billions of dollars of increased GDP, if not more. As one prominent billionaire Silicon Valley CEO told me when we recently discussed our mutual obsession with this issue: “Knowledge worker productivity is the moonshot of the twenty-first century.”</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">To help structure this massively important endeavor, I introduced <i class="calibre2">attention capital theory.</i> Once you accept that the primary capital resource in knowledge work is the human brains you employ (or, more accurately, these brains’ capacity to focus on information and produce new information that’s more valuable), then basic capitalist economics take over and make it obvious that success depends on the details of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_260" role="doc-pagebreak" title="260"></span>how you deploy this capital. When viewed through the lens of this theory, the hyperactive hive mind becomes just one of many ways to execute this deployment. This workflow has the advantage of being easy and flexible, but it also has the disadvantage of producing a low rate of return from your capital. This should sound familiar, as this story of starting with simple capital deployments before advancing to options that are more complex but also more profitable is one that, as I showed, was repeated many times during an earlier disruptive collision of technology and commerce: the industrial revolution.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">The remainder of part 2 then explored different principles for designing smarter workflows—that is, ways to perform knowledge work that are more effective than simply hooking everyone up to an inbox and letting them rock and roll. The ideas in these latter chapters aren’t meant to be a comprehensive playbook, as I’m an academic, not a business expert, but I hope that their specificity will be useful in sparking the development of new strategies custom-fit to the particular circumstances that define your organization or individual professional life.</p>
			<hr class="transition"/>
			<div aria-hidden="true" class="x04-space-break-orn">—</div>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">Near the end of his speech, Neil Postman said: “In the past, we experienced technological change in the manner of sleep-walkers. . . . This is a form of stupidity, especially in an age of vast technological change.” He was absolutely right. Digital-era knowledge work is, on any reasonable historical scale, a recent phenomenon. It’s absurdly ahistorical and shortsighted to assume that the easy workflows we threw together in the immediate aftermath of these tech breakthroughs are somehow <i class="calibre2">the best</i> ways to organize this complicated new type of work. Of course we didn’t get this exactly right on the first try—to have done so would have been exceptional. Once seen in this context, it should be clear that the efforts of this book have nothing to do with a reactionary rejection <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_261" role="doc-pagebreak" title="261"></span>of technology. The Luddites in this current moment are those who nostalgically cling to the hyperactive hive mind, claiming that there’s no need to keep striving to improve how we work in an increasingly high-tech world.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">Once we understand the contours of our frustrations with knowledge work, we recognize that we have the potential to make these efforts not only massively more productive, but also massively more fulfilling and sustainable. This has to be one of the most exciting and impactful challenges that almost no one is talking about . . . yet. “We need to proceed with our eyes wide open,” concluded Postman, “so that we may use technology rather than be used by it.” If you’re one of the many millions exhausted by your inbox, hopeful that there must be a better way to do good work in a culture currently obsessed by constant connectivity, then it’s time to open your <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_262" role="doc-pagebreak" title="262"></span>eyes.</p>
		</div>
	


  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html">Table of contents
</a></h2>
    <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="02_Also_by_Cal_Newport.xhtml">Also by Cal Newport</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="03_Title_Page.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="04_Copyright.xhtml">Copyright</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="05_Dedication.xhtml">Dedication</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="06_Contents.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="07_Introduction_The_Hype.xhtml">Introduction: The Hyperactive Hive Mind</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="08_Part_1_The_Case_Again.xhtml">Part 1: The Case Against Email</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml">Chapter 1: Email Reduces Productivity</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml">Chapter 2: Email Makes Us Miserable</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml">Chapter 3: Email Has a Mind of Its Own</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="12_Part_2_Principles_for.xhtml">Part 2: Principles for a World Without Email</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml">Chapter 4: The Attention Capital Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml">Chapter 5: The Process Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml">Chapter 6: The Protocol Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml">Chapter 7: The Specialization Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="17_Conclusion_The_Twenty.xhtml">Conclusion: The Twenty-First-Century Moonshot</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="18_Acknowledgments.xhtml">Acknowledgments</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="19_Notes.xhtml">Notes</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="20_Index.xhtml">Index</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="21_About_the_Author.xhtml">About the Author</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
    

    <a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html" class="calibreAHome">start
</a>

    
      <a href="18_Acknowledgments.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
