<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>Acknowledgments, A World Without Email</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:fdcd3175-275e-4545-9822-dd3618c31f20" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>

  


<link href="../../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html">A World Without Email: Reimagining Work in an Age of Communication Overload
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Cal Newport

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="17_Conclusion_The_Twenty.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
        

        
          <a href="19_Notes.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
		<div class="calibre1">
			<h1 class="x13-bm-ack-head" id="_idParaDest-28"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_263" role="doc-pagebreak" title="263" class="calibre4"></span>Acknowledgments</h1>
			<p class="x03-co-body-text">I began working on this book almost immediately after finishing the manuscript for <i class="calibre2">Deep Work.</i> At the time, I knew I had only scratched the surface of the complex landscape of issues afflicting knowledge work in an age of digital networks, but I was struggling to cohere these lingering thoughts into a useful framework. In the fall of 2015, as <i class="calibre2">Deep Work</i> was being prepared for printing, and my thinking was moving on to what would come next, I found myself browsing paperback displays at a Barnes &amp; Noble in Bethesda, Maryland (now, unfortunately, closed), when I came across a copy of Jaron Lanier’s book <i class="calibre2">Who Owns the Future?</i> I was impressed by how he complemented his criticism on the economic impacts of the internet’s architecture with a bold and clear proposal for an alternative. Standing there in the aisle, holding the book, a revelation hit me that all at once seemed to clarify the muddled mass of research and intuitions with which I’d been battling: What if work didn’t require email?</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">The first person to whom I pitched this vision was my wife, Julie, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_264" role="doc-pagebreak" title="264"></span>who has been helping me assess and mold book concepts since I signed my first contract with Random House at the age of twenty-one. She’s the key filter through which I run all early-stage book ideas, so her positivity set the whole process in motion. The second person to hear the pitch was my longtime literary agent and publishing mentor Laurie Abkemeier, who, improbably enough, has also been working with me since I was twenty-one. She, too, encouraged me to develop the concept, and so began a long, circuitous, intellectually exhilarating research process that ultimately led to my taking this book to the market, where my editor at Portfolio, Niki Papadopoulos, as well as the imprint publisher, Adrian Zackheim, were enthusiastic, and bought this book along with <i class="calibre2">Digital Minimalism (</i>which I ended up publishing first, in 2019). Niki went on to play an integral role in the shaping of this book, as well as the polishing of my tone and approach in tackling these topics more generally—efforts for which I’m endlessly grateful. I must also thank the publicity team at Portfolio, including Margot Stamas and Lillian Ball, with whom I worked closely on <i class="calibre2">Digital Minimalism</i> and am fortunate enough to work with again on this release, as well as Mary Kate Skehan, who coordinated the marketing, and Kimberly Meilun, who managed the publishing details.</p>
			<p class="x04-body-text">The number of writing colleagues, friends, family members, and neighbors who have heard me talk about this book concept over the years, and in turn offered smart advice, are too numerous to appropriately list, but their generosity in providing this feedback undoubtedly played a major role in sharpening my ideas. Finally, I want to highlight the contributions of my editor at <i class="calibre2">The</i> <i class="calibre2">New Yorker</i>, Joshua Rothman, who commissioned me to write two articles during this period on topics also covered in this book. These overlapping efforts helped accelerate the pace at which I was able to gather relevant research, and his editorial guidance helped improve both my thinking and writing on these topics.</p>
		</div>
	


  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html">Table of contents
</a></h2>
    <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="02_Also_by_Cal_Newport.xhtml">Also by Cal Newport</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="03_Title_Page.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="04_Copyright.xhtml">Copyright</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="05_Dedication.xhtml">Dedication</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="06_Contents.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="07_Introduction_The_Hype.xhtml">Introduction: The Hyperactive Hive Mind</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="08_Part_1_The_Case_Again.xhtml">Part 1: The Case Against Email</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml">Chapter 1: Email Reduces Productivity</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml">Chapter 2: Email Makes Us Miserable</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml">Chapter 3: Email Has a Mind of Its Own</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="12_Part_2_Principles_for.xhtml">Part 2: Principles for a World Without Email</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml">Chapter 4: The Attention Capital Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml">Chapter 5: The Process Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml">Chapter 6: The Protocol Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml">Chapter 7: The Specialization Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="17_Conclusion_The_Twenty.xhtml">Conclusion: The Twenty-First-Century Moonshot</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="18_Acknowledgments.xhtml">Acknowledgments</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="19_Notes.xhtml">Notes</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="20_Index.xhtml">Index</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="21_About_the_Author.xhtml">About the Author</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="17_Conclusion_The_Twenty.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
    

    <a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html" class="calibreAHome">start
</a>

    
      <a href="19_Notes.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
