<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>Notes, A World Without Email</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:fdcd3175-275e-4545-9822-dd3618c31f20" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../page_styles.css"/>

  


<link href="../../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html">A World Without Email: Reimagining Work in an Age of Communication Overload
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Cal Newport

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="18_Acknowledgments.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
        

        
          <a href="20_Index.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
		<div class="calibre1">
			<h1 class="x13-bm-ack-head" id="_idParaDest-29"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_265" role="doc-pagebreak" title="265" class="calibre4"></span>Notes</h1>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes-head-a">Introduction: The Hyperactive Hive Mind</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="07_Introduction_The_Hype.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber0" id="EndnoteNumber0" class="calibre3"><span>1</span></a><span>.</span> Chris Anderson, <i class="calibre2">Free: The Future of a Radical Price</i> (New York: Hyperion, 2009), 4.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="07_Introduction_The_Hype.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber1" id="EndnoteNumber1" class="calibre3"><span>2</span></a><span>.</span> Radicati Group, Inc., <i class="calibre2">Email Statistics Report</i>, 2015–2019, Palo Alto, CA, March 2015.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="07_Introduction_The_Hype.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber2" id="EndnoteNumber2" class="calibre3"><span>3</span></a><span>.</span> Jory MacKay, “Communication Overload: Our Research Shows Most Workers Can’t Go 6 Minutes without Checking Email or IM,” <i class="calibre2">RescueTime</i> (blog), July 11, 2018, <a href="https://blog.rescuetime.com/communication-multitasking-switches/" class="calibre3">https://blog.rescuetime.com/communication-multitasking-switches/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="07_Introduction_The_Hype.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber3" id="EndnoteNumber3" class="calibre3"><span>4</span></a><span>.</span> Gloria Mark et al., “Email Duration, Batching and Self-Interruption: Patterns of Email Use on Productivity and Stress,” <i class="calibre2">Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems</i>, May 2016, 1717–28. See table 2.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="07_Introduction_The_Hype.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber4" id="EndnoteNumber4" class="calibre3"><span>5</span></a><span>.</span> Adobe, “2018 Consumer Email Survey,” August 17, 2018, <a href="http://www.slideshare.net/adobe/2018-adobe-consumer-email-survey" class="calibre3">www.slideshare.net/adobe/2018-adobe-consumer-email-survey</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes-head-a">Chapter 1: Email Reduces Productivity</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber5" id="EndnoteNumber5" class="calibre3"><span>1</span></a><span>.</span> Victor M. González and Gloria Mark, “‘Constant, Constant, Multi-tasking Craziness’: Managing Multiple Working Spheres,” <i class="calibre2">Proceedings of the 2004 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_266" role="doc-pagebreak" title="266"></span>SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems</i>, April 2004, 113–20. I call this paper “famous” because it has been cited more than seven hundred times and is almost universally mentioned in articles and studies about distraction and attention in the modern workplace.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber6" id="EndnoteNumber6" class="calibre3"><span>2</span></a><span>.</span> González and Mark, “‘Constant, Constant.’” Table 1 of this paper captures an early form of the data indicating this swap. During my interviews with Mark, she elaborated and clarified this data, including pointing out some outlying data points. The portrayal of the data described in my text matches her updated explanation provided in this personal correspondence.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber7" id="EndnoteNumber7" class="calibre3"><span>3</span></a><span>.</span> Judy Wajcman and Emily Rose, “Constant Connectivity: Rethinking Interruptions at Work,” <i class="calibre2">Organization Studies</i> 32, no. 7 (July 2011): 941–61.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber8" id="EndnoteNumber8" class="calibre3"><span>4</span></a><span>.</span> Gloria Mark et al., “Email Duration, Batching and Self-Interruption: Patterns of Email Use on Productivity and Stress,” <i class="calibre2">Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems</i>, May 2016, 1717–28.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber9" id="EndnoteNumber9" class="calibre3"><span>5</span></a><span>.</span> Victoria Bellotti et al., “Quality Versus Quantity: E-mail–Centric Task Management and Its Relation with Overload,” <i class="calibre2">Human-Computer Interaction</i> 20 (2005): 89–138.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber10" id="EndnoteNumber10" class="calibre3"><span>6</span></a><span>.</span> Gail Fann Thomas et al., “Reconceptualizing E-mail Overload,” <i class="calibre2">Journal of Business and Technical Communication</i> 20, no. 3 (July 2006): 252–87.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber11" id="EndnoteNumber11" class="calibre3"><span>7</span></a><span>.</span> Stephen R. Barley, Debra E. Meyerson, and Stine Grodal, “E-mail as a Source and Symbol of Stress,” <i class="calibre2">Organization Science</i> 22, no. 4 (July–August 2011): 887–906.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber12" id="EndnoteNumber12" class="calibre3"><span>8</span></a><span>.</span> Radicati Group, Inc., <i class="calibre2">Email Statistics Report</i>, 2015–2019, Palo Alto, CA, March 2015.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber13" id="EndnoteNumber13" class="calibre3"><span>9</span></a><span>.</span> Jory MacKay, “Communication Overload: Our Research Shows Most Workers Can’t Go 6 Minutes without Checking Email or IM,” <i class="calibre2">RescueTime</i> (blog), July 11, 2018, <a href="https://blog.rescuetime.com/communication-multitasking-switches/" class="calibre3">https://blog.rescuetime.com/communication-multitasking-switches/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber14" id="EndnoteNumber14" class="calibre3"><span>10</span></a><span>.</span> Jory MacKay, “The True Cost of Email and IM: You Only Have 1 Hour and 12 Minutes of Uninterrupted Productive Time a Day,” <i class="calibre2">RescueTime</i> (blog), May 10, 2018, <a href="https://blog.rescuetime.com/communication-multitasking/" class="calibre3">https://blog.rescuetime.com/communication-multitasking/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber15" id="EndnoteNumber15" class="calibre3"><span>11</span></a><span>.</span> Deirdre Boden, <i class="calibre2">The Business of Talk: Organizations in Action</i> (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 1994), 211. It should be noted that Boden was not unreservedly positive about this development in knowledge work. She also predicted that these “interactive” workplaces would be “technologically complex” and “interpersonally demanding.”</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber16" id="EndnoteNumber16" class="calibre3"><span>12</span></a><span>.</span> See, for example, this classic paper on the prefrontal cortex and attention, which has been cited more than ten thousand times since its 2001 publication: Earl K. Miller and Jonathan D. Cohen, “An Integrative Theory of Prefrontal Cortex Function,” <i class="calibre2">Annual Review of Neuroscience</i> 24 (March 2001): 167–202.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_267" role="doc-pagebreak" title="267"></span><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber17" id="EndnoteNumber17" class="calibre3"><span>13</span></a><span>.</span> Adam Gazzaley and Larry D. Rosen, <i class="calibre2">The Distracted Mind: Ancient Brains in a High-Tech World</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016), 77.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber18" id="EndnoteNumber18" class="calibre3"><span>14</span></a><span>.</span> A. T. Jersild, “Mental Set and Shift,” <i class="calibre2">Archives of Psychology</i> 14, no. 89 (1927): 1–81. This paper, along with other key papers on executive control functions that I consulted, was brought to my attention by the useful literature review included in the following paper: Joshua S. Rubinstein, David E. Meyer, and Jeffrey E. Evans, “Executive Control of Cognitive Processes in Task Switching,” <i class="calibre2">Journal of Experimental Psychology</i> 27, no. 4 (2001): 763–97.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber19" id="EndnoteNumber19" class="calibre3"><span>15</span></a><span>.</span> Gazzaley and Rosen note that these experiments are easy to try on yourself at home. They suggest the following version: Time how long it takes to go through the alphabet from A to J, and then through the numbers from 1 to 10. Next, time how long it takes for you to combine these tasks by dual counting: i.e., A1, B2, C3, and so on. You should notice a difference, as the letter and number counting draw on two different networks.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber20" id="EndnoteNumber20" class="calibre3"><span>16</span></a><span>.</span> Sophie Leroy, “Why Is It So Hard to Do My Work? The Challenge of Attention Residue When Switching between Work Tasks,” <i class="calibre2">Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes</i> 109, no. 2 (July 2009): 168–81.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber21" id="EndnoteNumber21" class="calibre3"><span>17</span></a><span>.</span> Paul Graham, “Maker’s Schedule, Manager’s Schedule,” July 2009, <a href="http://www.paulgraham.com/makersschedule.html" class="calibre3">www.paulgraham.com/makersschedule.html</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber22" id="EndnoteNumber22" class="calibre3"><span>18</span></a><span>.</span> “Marshall Retires as Chief of Staff,” George C. Marshall Foundation, November 17, 2017, <a href="http://www.marshallfoundation.org/blog/marshall-retires-chief-staff/" class="calibre3">www.marshallfoundation.org/blog/marshall-retires-chief-staff/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber23" id="EndnoteNumber23" class="calibre3"><span>19</span></a><span>.</span> For more on George Marshall’s career timeline, see “George C. Marshall: Timeline &amp; Chronology,” George C. Marshall Foundation, <a href="http://www.marshallfoundation.org/marshall/timeline-chronology/" class="calibre3">www.marshallfoundation.org/marshall/timeline-chronology/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber24" id="EndnoteNumber24" class="calibre3"><span>20</span></a><span>.</span> Lt. Col. Paul G. Munch, “General George C. Marshall and the Army Staff: A Study in Effective Staff Leadership” (research paper, National War College, Washington, DC, March 19, 1992), <a href="https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA437156" class="calibre3">https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA437156</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber25" id="EndnoteNumber25" class="calibre3"><span>21</span></a><span>.</span> Christopher C. Rosen et al., “Boxed In by Your Inbox: Implications of Daily E-mail Demands for Managers’ Leadership Behaviors,” <i class="calibre2">Journal of Applied Psychology</i> 104, no. 1 (2019): 19–33.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber26" id="EndnoteNumber26" class="calibre3"><span>22</span></a><span>.</span> For more on the history of help-desk software, see, for example, Arthur Zuckerman, “History of Help Desk Software: Evolution and Future Trends,” CompareCamp.com, February 2015, <a href="https://comparecamp.com/history-of-help-desk-software-evolution-and-future-trends/" class="calibre3">https://comparecamp.com/history-of-help-desk-software-evolution-and-future-trends/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber27" id="EndnoteNumber27" class="calibre3"><span>23</span></a><span>.</span> The primary source for this quote is a 1983 interview of Angelou conducted by Claudia Tate (in <i class="calibre2">Conversations with Maya Angelou</i>, ed. Jeffrey M. Elliot [Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1989], 146–56). As with many compelling anecdotes about artists’ creative habits, I first came across this <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_268" role="doc-pagebreak" title="268"></span>quote in Mason Currey’s underground classic book <i class="calibre2">Daily Rituals: How Artists Work </i>(New York: Knopf, 2013).</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber28" id="EndnoteNumber28" class="calibre3"><span>24</span></a><span>.</span> An addendum to this tale: When I followed up with Sean in 2019, three years after my initial interviews, his company had by then dissolved—for personal reasons unrelated to productivity, I hasten to add—preventing me from reporting on how his shift from the hyperactive hive mind evolved over time. In more recent correspondence, however, Sean assured me that if he ends up once again leading a large team, he plans to put in place similar alternatives to the hive mind—the sound of Slack notifications still makes him shiver.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes-head-a">Chapter 2: Email Makes Us Miserable</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber29" id="EndnoteNumber29" class="calibre3"><span>1</span></a><span>.</span> Harry Cooper, “French Workers Gain ‘Right to Disconnect,’” <i class="calibre2">Politico</i>, December 31, 2016, <a href="http://www.politico.eu/article/french-workers-gain-right-to-disconnect-workers-rights-labor-law/" class="calibre3">www.politico.eu/article/french-workers-gain-right-to-disconnect-workers-rights-labor-law/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber30" id="EndnoteNumber30" class="calibre3"><span>2</span></a><span>.</span> Gloria Mark et al., “Email Duration, Batching and Self-Interruption: Patterns of Email Use on Productivity and Stress,” <i class="calibre2">Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems</i>, May 2016, 1717–28.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber31" id="EndnoteNumber31" class="calibre3"><span>3</span></a><span>.</span> Fatema Akbar et al., “Email Makes You Sweat: Examining Email Interruptions and Stress Using Thermal Imaging,” <i class="calibre2">Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems</i>, May 2019, 1–14.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber32" id="EndnoteNumber32" class="calibre3"><span>4</span></a><span>.</span> These concluding remarks come from Mark et al., “Email Duration.”</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber33" id="EndnoteNumber33" class="calibre3"><span>5</span></a><span>.</span> Magdalena Stadin et al., “Repeated Exposure to High ICT Demands at Work, and Development of Suboptimal Self-Rated Health: Findings from a 4-Year Follow-Up of the SLOSH Study,” <i class="calibre2">International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health</i> 92, no. 5 (2019): 717–28.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber34" id="EndnoteNumber34" class="calibre3"><span>6</span></a><span>.</span> Leslie A. Perlow, <i class="calibre2">Sleeping with Your Smartphone: How to Break the 24/7 Habit and Change the Way You Work</i> (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2012), 5.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber35" id="EndnoteNumber35" class="calibre3"><span>7</span></a><span>.</span> Perlow, <i class="calibre2">Sleeping with Your Smartphone</i>, 5. We’ll revisit Perlow’s answer to this question in more detail in the next chapter, but the short version is as follows: no one ever did decide that this workflow was a good idea; instead, in Perlow’s estimation, it emerged somewhat haphazardly from an uncontrolled behavioral feedback loop.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber36" id="EndnoteNumber36" class="calibre3"><span>8</span></a><span>.</span> John Freeman, <i class="calibre2">The Tyranny of E-mail: The Four-Thousand-Year Journey to Your Inbox</i> (New York: Scribner, 2011), 12.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber37" id="EndnoteNumber37" class="calibre3"><span>9</span></a><span>.</span> Douglas Rushkoff, <i class="calibre2">Present Shock: When Everything Happens Now</i> (New York: Current, 2013), 95.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber38" id="EndnoteNumber38" class="calibre3"><span>10</span></a><span>.</span> James Manyika et al., “Disruptive Technologies: Advances That Will Transform Life, Business, and the Global Economy,” McKinsey Global Institute, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_269" role="doc-pagebreak" title="269"></span>May 1, 2013, <a href="http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/disruptive-technologies" class="calibre3">www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/disruptive-technologies</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber39" id="EndnoteNumber39" class="calibre3"><span>11</span></a><span>.</span> This report from the Federal Reserve estimates more than sixty million “nonroutine cognitive” jobs in 2016: “Job Polarization,” <i class="calibre2">FRED Blog</i>, April 28, 2016, <a href="https://fredblog.stlouisfed.org/2016/04/job-polarization/" class="calibre3">https://fredblog.stlouisfed.org/2016/04/job-polarization/</a>. In 2016, the size of the US labor force was approximately 156 million: Erin Duffin, “Civilian Labor Force in the United States from 1990 to 2019,” Statista, January 30, 2020, <a href="http://www.statista.com/statistics/191750/civilian-labor-force-in-the-us-since-1990/" class="calibre3">www.statista.com/statistics/191750/civilian-labor-force-in-the-us-since-1990/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber40" id="EndnoteNumber40" class="calibre3"><span>12</span></a><span>.</span> As the researchers who study extant hunter-gatherer groups are careful to emphasize, it’s a fallacy to portray these tribes as somehow existing <i class="calibre2">unchanged</i> from our Paleolithic past—these are cognitively modern humans with regular interactions with modern society. As Yuval Noah Harari points out in the opening of his book <i class="calibre2">Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind</i> (New York: HarperCollins, 2015), it’s also worth remembering that the very fact that such tribes still exist underscores that there must be something remarkable about them as compared with the countless other groups that shifted their lifestyles (e.g., perhaps they exist in environments too harsh to support farming-based lifestyles). All that being said, they do provide insight into hunter-gatherer social dynamics. To avoid falling into the trap of evolutionary <i class="calibre2">just so</i> stories, when I do later extrapolate from those dynamics to forces that affect our modern brain, I do so with care, marshaling other, more contemporary strains of evidence to support the claims.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber41" id="EndnoteNumber41" class="calibre3"><span>13</span></a><span>.</span> Nikhil Chaudhary et al., “Competition for Cooperation: Variability, Benefits and Heritability of Relational Wealth in Hunter-Gatherers,” <i class="calibre2">Scientific Reports</i> 6, no. 29120 (July 2016): 1–7.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber42" id="EndnoteNumber42" class="calibre3"><span>14</span></a><span>.</span> Abigail E. Page et al., “Hunter-Gatherer Social Networks and Reproductive Success,” <i class="calibre2">Scientific Reports</i> 7, no. 1153 (April 2017): 1–10.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber43" id="EndnoteNumber43" class="calibre3"><span>15</span></a><span>.</span> The definitions of what makes someone robustly connected to a social network are interesting but also somewhat technical. Certainly, the number of strong connections you have to other people in the social network matters, but so do other metrics, like <i class="calibre2">centrality</i>, <i class="calibre2">closeness</i>, and <i class="calibre2">betweenness</i>, which, roughly speaking, all describe how well you are indirectly connected to the network through friends, friends of friends, and so on. If you’re only a few short and strong hops away from most people in your tribe—the BaYaka equivalent of Kevin Bacon—you’re likely quite popular.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber44" id="EndnoteNumber44" class="calibre3"><span>16</span></a><span>.</span> Matthew D. Lieberman,<i class="calibre2"> Social: Why Our Brains Are Wired to Connect</i> (New York: Broadway Books, 2014), 9.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber45" id="EndnoteNumber45" class="calibre3"><span>17</span></a><span>.</span> King James Version, Leviticus 19:16.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber46" id="EndnoteNumber46" class="calibre3"><span>18</span></a><span>.</span> William Shakespeare, <i class="calibre2">Richard II</i>, act 3, scene 2. Quote from MIT’s public <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_270" role="doc-pagebreak" title="270"></span>domain Shakespeare website: <a href="http://shakespeare.mit.edu/richardii/richardii.3.2.html" class="calibre3">http://shakespeare.mit.edu/richardii/richardii.3.2.html</a>. Emphasis mine.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber47" id="EndnoteNumber47" class="calibre3"><span>19</span></a><span>.</span> Russell B. Clayton, Glenn Leshner, and Anthony Almond, “The Extended iSelf: The Impact of iPhone Separation on Cognition, Emotion, and Physiology,” <i class="calibre2">Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication</i> 20, no. 2 (March 2015): 119–35.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber48" id="EndnoteNumber48" class="calibre3"><span>20</span></a><span>.</span> Arianna Huffington, “How to Keep Email from Ruining Your Vacation,” <i class="calibre2">Harvard Business Review</i>, August 23, 2017, <a href="https://hbr.org/2017/08/how-to-keep-email-from-ruining-your-vacation" class="calibre3">https://hbr.org/2017/08/how-to-keep-email-from-ruining-your-vacation</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber49" id="EndnoteNumber49" class="calibre3"><span>21</span></a><span>.</span> Richard W. Byrne, “How Monkeys Find Their Way: Leadership, Coordination, and Cognitive Maps of African Baboons,” in <i class="calibre2">On the Move: How and Why Animals Travel in Groups</i>, ed. Sue Boinski and Paul A. Garber (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 501. I encountered this quote in the paper cited in the next note.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber50" id="EndnoteNumber50" class="calibre3"><span>22</span></a><span>.</span> Ariana Strandburg-Peshkin et al., “Shared Decision-Making Drives Collective Movement in Wild Baboons,” <i class="calibre2">Science</i> 348, no. 6241 (June 2015): 1358–61.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber51" id="EndnoteNumber51" class="calibre3"><span>23</span></a><span>.</span> The use of script for accounting purposes dates back as far as ten thousand years, but it’s commonly accepted that the more general use of script that we associate today with written expression didn’t begin to emerge until around 3000 BCE in Mesopotamia. Here is a good source on this history: Denise Schmandt-Besserat, “The Evolution of Writing,” January 25, 2014, <a href="https://sites.utexas.edu/dsb/tokens/the-evolution-of-writing/" class="calibre3">https://sites.utexas.edu/dsb/tokens/the-evolution-of-writing/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber52" id="EndnoteNumber52" class="calibre3"><span>24</span></a><span>.</span> This experiment is described here: Alex (Sandy) Pentland, <i class="calibre2">Honest Signals: How They Shape Our World</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010), vii–viii<i class="calibre2">.</i> Some of the details of the sociometers in this description come from this magazine profile of Pentland: Maria Konnikova, “Meet the Godfather of Wearables,” <i class="calibre2">The Verge</i>, May 6, 2014, <a href="http://www.theverge.com/2014/5/6/5661318/the-wizard-alex-pentland-father-of-the-wearable-computer" class="calibre3">www.theverge.com/2014/5/6/5661318/the-wizard-alex-pentland-father-of-the-wearable-computer</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber53" id="EndnoteNumber53" class="calibre3"><span>25</span></a><span>.</span> Pentland, <i class="calibre2">Honest Signals</i>, x.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber54" id="EndnoteNumber54" class="calibre3"><span>26</span></a><span>.</span> Pentland, <i class="calibre2">Honest Signals</i>, x.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber55" id="EndnoteNumber55" class="calibre3"><span>27</span></a><span>.</span> Pentland, <i class="calibre2">Honest Signals</i>, 5.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber56" id="EndnoteNumber56" class="calibre3"><span>28</span></a><span>.</span> Pentland, <i class="calibre2">Honest Signals</i>, viii–ix.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber57" id="EndnoteNumber57" class="calibre3"><span>29</span></a><span>.</span> Pentland, <i class="calibre2">Honest Signals</i>, 82.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber58" id="EndnoteNumber58" class="calibre3"><span>30</span></a><span>.</span> Elizabeth Louise Newton, “Overconfidence in the Communication of Intent: Heard and Unheard Melodies” [original title, “The Rocky Road from Actions to Intentions”] (unpublished PhD diss., Stanford University, 1990). Details on this unpublished dissertation, including Newton’s interpretation and the 3 percent number, come from a summary of this work found in Justin Kruger et al., “Egocentrism over E-mail: Can We Communicate as <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_271" role="doc-pagebreak" title="271"></span>Well as We Think?,” <i class="calibre2">Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</i> 89, no. 6 (December 2005): 925–36.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber59" id="EndnoteNumber59" class="calibre3"><span>31</span></a><span>.</span> Kruger et al., “Egocentrism over E-mail.”</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber60" id="EndnoteNumber60" class="calibre3"><span>32</span></a><span>.</span> Sherry Turkle, <i class="calibre2">Reclaiming Conversation: The Power of Talk in a Digital Age</i> (New York: Penguin, 2016), 261–62.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber61" id="EndnoteNumber61" class="calibre3"><span>33</span></a><span>.</span> Gloria J. Mark, Stephen Voida, and Armand V. Cardello, “‘A Pace Not Dictated by Electrons’: An Empirical Study of Work without Email,” <i class="calibre2">Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems</i>, May 2012, 555–64.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber62" id="EndnoteNumber62" class="calibre3"><span>34</span></a><span>.</span> David Allen, <i class="calibre2">Getting Things Done: The Art of Stress-Free Productivity</i>, rev. ed. (New York: Penguin, 2015), 8.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber63" id="EndnoteNumber63" class="calibre3"><span>35</span></a><span>.</span> Allen, <i class="calibre2">Getting Things Done</i>, 87–88.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber64" id="EndnoteNumber64" class="calibre3"><span>36</span></a><span>.</span> Victor M. González and Gloria Mark, “‘Constant, Constant, Multi-tasking Craziness’: Managing Multiple Working Spheres,” <i class="calibre2">Proceedings of the 2004 SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems</i>, April 2004, 113–20.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber65" id="EndnoteNumber65" class="calibre3"><span>37</span></a><span>.</span> Gloria Mark, Victor M. González, and Justin Harris, “No Task Left Behind?: Examining the Nature of Fragmented Work,” <i class="calibre2">Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems</i>, April 2005, 321–30.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber66" id="EndnoteNumber66" class="calibre3"><span>38</span></a><span>.</span> Brigid Schulte, <i class="calibre2">Overwhelmed: How to Work</i>,<i class="calibre2"> Love</i>,<i class="calibre2"> and Play When No One Has the Time</i> (New York: Picador, 2015), 5.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber67" id="EndnoteNumber67" class="calibre3"><span>39</span></a><span>.</span> Sheila Dodge, Don Kieffer, and Nelson P. Repenning, “Breaking Logjams in Knowledge Work: How Organizations Can Improve Task Flow and Prevent Overload,” <i class="calibre2">MIT Sloan Management Review</i>, September 6, 2018, <a href="https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/breaking-logjams-in-knowledge-work/" class="calibre3">https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/breaking-logjams-in-knowledge-work/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes-head-a">Chapter 3: Email Has a Mind of Its Own</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber68" id="EndnoteNumber68" class="calibre3"><span>1</span></a><span>.</span> The story of the CIA’s pneumatic tubes and the general push for practical asynchrony is adapted from my 2019 <i class="calibre2">New Yorker</i> article on the history of email: Cal Newport, “Was E-mail a Mistake?,” Annals of Technology, <i class="calibre2">New Yorker</i>, August 6, 2019, <a href="http://www.newyorker.com/tech/annals-of-technology/was-e-mail-a-mistake" class="calibre3">www.newyorker.com/tech/annals-of-technology/was-e-mail-a-mistake</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber69" id="EndnoteNumber69" class="calibre3"><span>2</span></a><span>.</span> According to the CIA historians I consulted during my research, office networking technology was a big part of the reason the tube system was not expanded during the headquarters renovation. It was clear by the 1980s that pneumatic tubes were quite old-fashioned compared with the newly arrived ability to communicate with electrons through wires.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber70" id="EndnoteNumber70" class="calibre3"><span>3</span></a><span>.</span> Erik Sandberg-Diment, “Personal Computers: Refinements for ‘E-mail,’” <i class="calibre2">New York Times</i>, May 26, 1987.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_272" role="doc-pagebreak" title="272"></span><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber71" id="EndnoteNumber71" class="calibre3"><span>4</span></a><span>.</span> Anne Thompson, “The Executive Life: Forget Doing Lunch—Hollywood’s on E-mail,” <i class="calibre2">New York Times</i>, September 6, 1992.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber72" id="EndnoteNumber72" class="calibre3"><span>5</span></a><span>.</span> John Markoff, “Computer Mail Gaining a Market,” <i class="calibre2">New York Times</i>, December 26, 1989.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber73" id="EndnoteNumber73" class="calibre3"><span>6</span></a><span>.</span> Stephen C. Miller, “Networking: Now Software Giants Are Targeting E-mail,” <i class="calibre2">New York Times</i>, May 31, 1992.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber74" id="EndnoteNumber74" class="calibre3"><span>7</span></a><span>.</span> Peter H. Lewis, “Personal Computers: The Good, the Bad and the Truly Ugly Faces of Electronic Mail,” <i class="calibre2">New York Times</i>, September 6, 1994.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber75" id="EndnoteNumber75" class="calibre3"><span>8</span></a><span>.</span> The value of the fact that email is easy to learn shouldn’t be underestimated. As Gloria Mark explained to me, during the 1980s and 1990s, as computer networks became more widespread, there was a lot of academic research on how best to leverage this technology to support workplace collaboration. Much of this research focused on advanced multiuser network applications that were customized for specific purposes—like collaboratively editing a certain type of document. As Mark told me, email dominated where these bespoke solutions faltered because it was so easy to learn and could be applied to many different types of work. A onetime investment in an email server could simplify collaboration in all aspects of your business.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber76" id="EndnoteNumber76" class="calibre3"><span>9</span></a><span>.</span> The story and quote come from this Quora thread: <a href="http://www.quora.com/What-was-it-like-to-work-in-an-office-before-the-birth-of-personal-computers-email-and-fax-machines" class="calibre3">www.quora.com/What-was-it-like-to-work-in-an-office-before-the-birth-of-personal-computers-email-and-fax-machines</a>. I also interviewed Stone to confirm and elaborate some of these points.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber77" id="EndnoteNumber77" class="calibre3"><span>10</span></a><span>.</span> For a discussion and summary of Brunner’s arguments, including relevant citations, see Lynn White Jr., <i class="calibre2">Medieval Technology and Social Change</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1966), 3.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber78" id="EndnoteNumber78" class="calibre3"><span>11</span></a><span>.</span> White, <i class="calibre2">Medieval Technology</i>, 5.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber79" id="EndnoteNumber79" class="calibre3"><span>12</span></a><span>.</span> White, <i class="calibre2">Medieval Technology</i>, 13.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber80" id="EndnoteNumber80" class="calibre3"><span>13</span></a><span>.</span> White, <i class="calibre2">Medieval Technology</i>, 13.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber81" id="EndnoteNumber81" class="calibre3"><span>14</span></a><span>.</span> As Lynn White Jr. elaborates, though Benedictine monks were trying to stop the practice, around this period many Frankish warriors were being buried with their horses, allowing modern archaeologists to dig up evidence about how these horses were equipped in battle. Also around this time, the words used to describe mounting and dismounting horses shifted from verbs that captured the action of leaping up on a horse to verbs that captured more of a stepping behavior.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber82" id="EndnoteNumber82" class="calibre3"><span>15</span></a><span>.</span> White, <i class="calibre2">Medieval Technology</i>, 2.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber83" id="EndnoteNumber83" class="calibre3"><span>16</span></a><span>.</span> Neil Postman, <i class="calibre2">Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business</i> (New York: Penguin, 1985), 51.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber84" id="EndnoteNumber84" class="calibre3"><span>17</span></a><span>.</span> For more on this history, see chapter 1 of my previous book: Cal Newport, <i class="calibre2">Digital Minimalism: Choosing a Focused Life in a Noisy World</i> (New York: Portfolio/Penguin, 2019).</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_273" role="doc-pagebreak" title="273"></span><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber85" id="EndnoteNumber85" class="calibre3"><span>18</span></a><span>.</span> Blake Thorne, “Asynchronous Communication Is the Future of Work,” <i class="calibre2">I Done This</i> (blog), June 30, 2020, <a href="http://blog.idonethis.com/asynchronous-communication/" class="calibre3">http://blog.idonethis.com/asynchronous-communication/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber86" id="EndnoteNumber86" class="calibre3"><span>19</span></a><span>.</span> Radicati Group, Inc., <i class="calibre2">Email Statistics Report</i>, 2015–2019, Palo Alto, CA, March 2015.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber87" id="EndnoteNumber87" class="calibre3"><span>20</span></a><span>.</span> Michael J. Fischer, Nancy A. Lynch, and Michael S. Paterson, “Impossibility of Distributed Consensus with One Faulty Process,” <i class="calibre2">Journal of the ACM</i> 32, no. 2 (April 1985): 374–82.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber88" id="EndnoteNumber88" class="calibre3"><span>21</span></a><span>.</span> For the interested reader, the high-level summary of this impossibility proof unfolds as follows. Every consensus algorithm must, at some point, have each machine look at the messages it has received so far and determine whether to proceed or abort. Regardless of what rule you use to make this decision, there must be some boundary between proceed and abort, where changing just a single message pushes you from one decision to the other. The proof essentially brings a lot of machines right up against this boundary, then crashes the machine that sends the key message halfway through its sending, meaning that some machines receive the message and some don’t—leading to conflicting decisions. Interestingly, if you’re allowed to flip coins and are satisfied with an algorithm that solves the problem with high probability, then it is solvable. Similarly, if you assume any sort of reasonable time-out on how long to wait for a machine before you know for sure it has crashed, you can also solve the problem.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber89" id="EndnoteNumber89" class="calibre3"><span>22</span></a><span>.</span> I was at the ceremony in Paris where Lamport was awarded his prize. In typical French fashion, the government officials in attendance wore impeccable suits. In typical computer scientist fashion, Lamport wore shorts and a T-shirt.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber90" id="EndnoteNumber90" class="calibre3"><span>23</span></a><span>.</span> Leslie A. Perlow, <i class="calibre2">Sleeping with Your Smartphone: How to Break the 24/7 Habit and Change the Way You Work</i> (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2012), 2.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber91" id="EndnoteNumber91" class="calibre3"><span>24</span></a><span>.</span> Perlow, <i class="calibre2">Sleeping with Your Smartphone</i>, 8.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber92" id="EndnoteNumber92" class="calibre3"><span>25</span></a><span>.</span> Perlow, <i class="calibre2">Sleeping with Your Smartphone</i>, 5.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber93" id="EndnoteNumber93" class="calibre3"><span>26</span></a><span>.</span> Douglas Rushkoff, <i class="calibre2">Present Shock: When Everything Happens Now</i> (New York: Current, 2013), 100.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber94" id="EndnoteNumber94" class="calibre3"><span>27</span></a><span>.</span> Aviad Agam and Ran Barkai, “Elephant and Mammoth Hunting during the Paleolithic: A Review of the Relevant Archaeological, Ethnographic and Ethno-historical Records,” <i class="calibre2">Quaternary</i> 1, no. 3 (February 2018): 1–28.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber95" id="EndnoteNumber95" class="calibre3"><span>28</span></a><span>.</span> “Is Your Team Too Big? Too Small? What’s the Right Number?,” <i class="calibre2">Knowledge@Wharton</i>, June 14, 2006, <a href="https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/is-your-team-too-big-too-small-whats-the-right-number-2/" class="calibre3">https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/is-your-team-too-big-too-small-whats-the-right-number-2/</a>. This article is also the source of the information about Ringelmann’s research summarized in the discussion that follows.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_274" role="doc-pagebreak" title="274"></span><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber96" id="EndnoteNumber96" class="calibre3"><span>29</span></a><span>.</span> Information on Drucker’s early life, including his parents’ salons, can be found at the Drucker Institute’s bio of its namesake: <a href="http://www.drucker.institute/perspective/about-peter-drucker/" class="calibre3">www.drucker.institute/perspective/about-peter-drucker/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber97" id="EndnoteNumber97" class="calibre3"><span>30</span></a><span>.</span> One of many places where this epithet is bestowed: Steve Denning, “The Best of Peter Drucker,” <i class="calibre2">Forbes</i>, July 29, 2014, <a href="http://www.forbes.com/sites/stevedenning/2014/07/29/the-best-of-peter-drucker" class="calibre3">www.forbes.com/sites/stevedenning/2014/07/29/the-best-of-peter-drucker</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber98" id="EndnoteNumber98" class="calibre3"><span>31</span></a><span>.</span> Peter F. Drucker, <i class="calibre2">The Future of Industrial Man</i> (Rutgers, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2011), 13.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber99" id="EndnoteNumber99" class="calibre3"><span>32</span></a><span>.</span> For more on Drucker’s GM engagement, see the following account: “How Drucker ‘Invented’ Management at GM,” Drucker Society of Austria, 2009, <a href="http://www.druckersociety.at/index.php/peterdruckerhome/biography/how-drucker-invented-management-at-general-motors" class="calibre3">www.druckersociety.at/index.php/peterdruckerhome/biography/how-drucker-invented-management-at-general-motors</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber100" id="EndnoteNumber100" class="calibre3"><span>33</span></a><span>.</span> This quote is reproduced in the Drucker Institute’s timeline of Drucker’s life, <a href="http://www.drucker.institute/perspective/about-peter-drucker/" class="calibre3">www.drucker.institute/perspective/about-peter-drucker/</a>. It also appears in the April 14 entry of Peter F. Drucker, <i class="calibre2">The Daily Drucker: 366 Days of Insight and Motivation for Getting the Right Things Done</i> (New York: Harper Business, 2004).</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber101" id="EndnoteNumber101" class="calibre3"><span>34</span></a><span>.</span> Peter F. Drucker, <i class="calibre2">The Effective Executive: The Definitive Guide to Getting the Right Things Done</i>, rev. ed. (New York: Harper Business, 2006), 4.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber102" id="EndnoteNumber102" class="calibre3"><span>35</span></a><span>.</span> Peter F. Drucker, “Knowledge-Worker Productivity: The Biggest Challenge,” <i class="calibre2">California Management Review</i> 41, no. 2 (Winter 1999): 79–94. Italics in the original.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber103" id="EndnoteNumber103" class="calibre3"><span>36</span></a><span>.</span> Lloyd didn’t use the phrase “tragedy of the commons.” This label was introduced later in a now famous article that rigorously analyzes the scenario: Garrett Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons,” <i class="calibre2">Science</i> 162, no. 3859 (December 1968): 1243–48.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes-head-a">Chapter 4: The Attention Capital Principle</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber104" id="EndnoteNumber104" class="calibre3"><span>1</span></a><span>.</span> Joshua B. Freeman, <i class="calibre2">Behemoth: A History of the Factory and the Making of the Modern World</i> (New York: W. W. Norton, 2019), 124.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber105" id="EndnoteNumber105" class="calibre3"><span>2</span></a><span>.</span> The details of the development of the assembly line, including the specific numbers cited in this discussion, come from two excellent secondary sources: Freeman, <i class="calibre2">Behemoth</i>, 119–26; and Simon Winchester, <i class="calibre2">The Perfectionists: How Precision Engineers Created the Modern World</i> (New York: Harper, 2018), 159–66.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber106" id="EndnoteNumber106" class="calibre3"><span>3</span></a><span>.</span> As Simon Winchester points out in <i class="calibre2">The Perfectionists</i> (see preceding note), at the same time as the Model T’s rise, Henry Royce’s ultra-luxury vehicles, such as the Rolls-Royce Silver Ghost, which were hand-built by skilled craftsmen, were marketed as the height of precision engineering. In reality, however, the pieces of the lowly Model T were manufactured with considerably <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_275" role="doc-pagebreak" title="275"></span>more exactitude—the high price of the Rolls-Royce afforded its manufacturer the labor required to hand-adjust looser parts into a tight fit.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber107" id="EndnoteNumber107" class="calibre3"><span>4</span></a><span>.</span> Freeman, <i class="calibre2">Behemoth</i>, 123.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber108" id="EndnoteNumber108" class="calibre3"><span>5</span></a><span>.</span> As Simon Winchester points out, American armories had geared up mass production lines years earlier. By 1913, sewing machine, bicycle, and typewriter manufacturers had also begun taking advantage of the interchangeable parts revolution to experiment with fast-moving assembly lines. Ford claims, however, that his main inspiration was actually the <i class="calibre2">disassembly</i> of animal carcasses that he had witnessed at the nearby Chicago meatpacking plants, where the knife-wielding meatpackers stood in place while the animals moved by, hanging from chains.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber109" id="EndnoteNumber109" class="calibre3"><span>6</span></a><span>.</span> Cal Newport, “5-Hour Workdays? 4-Day Workweeks? Yes, Please,” <i class="calibre2">New York Times</i>, November 6, 2019.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber110" id="EndnoteNumber110" class="calibre3"><span>7</span></a><span>.</span> Winchester,<i class="calibre2"> Perfectionists</i>, 160.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber111" id="EndnoteNumber111" class="calibre3"><span>8</span></a><span>.</span> Peter F. Drucker, “Knowledge-Worker Productivity: The Biggest Challenge,” <i class="calibre2">California Management Review</i> 41, no. 2 (Winter 1999): 79–94. Italics in the original.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber112" id="EndnoteNumber112" class="calibre3"><span>9</span></a><span>.</span> Drucker, “Knowledge-Worker Productivity.”</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber113" id="EndnoteNumber113" class="calibre3"><span>10</span></a><span>.</span> In industrial economics, the workers were considered more dispensable: a sort of generic force used to activate your main capital resources into motion. This mindset was the foundation of worker dehumanization. As I’ll elaborate, one of the benefits of knowledge work versus the industrial alternatives is that the workers are no longer dispensable, but are actually now at the core of an organization’s value, enabling the potential for much more human-centric working environments.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber114" id="EndnoteNumber114" class="calibre3"><span>11</span></a><span>.</span> Peter F. Drucker, <i class="calibre2">The Effective Executive: The Definitive Guide to Getting the Right Things Done</i>, rev. ed. (New York: Harper Business, 2006), 4.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber115" id="EndnoteNumber115" class="calibre3"><span>12</span></a><span>.</span> Freeman, <i class="calibre2">Behemoth</i>, 123.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber116" id="EndnoteNumber116" class="calibre3"><span>13</span></a><span>.</span> Peter F. Drucker, <i class="calibre2">Landmarks of Tomorrow: A Report on the New “Post-Modern” World</i> (New York: Harper Colophon, 1965), 31.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber117" id="EndnoteNumber117" class="calibre3"><span>14</span></a><span>.</span> James T. McCay, <i class="calibre2">The Management of Time</i> (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1959), ix.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber118" id="EndnoteNumber118" class="calibre3"><span>15</span></a><span>.</span> Freeman, <i class="calibre2">Behemoth</i>, 126.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber119" id="EndnoteNumber119" class="calibre3"><span>16</span></a><span>.</span> Freeman, <i class="calibre2">Behemoth</i>, 127.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber120" id="EndnoteNumber120" class="calibre3"><span>17</span></a><span>.</span> These details, and the connection of <i class="calibre2">Modern Times</i> to Ford’s plant, come from David E. Nye, <i class="calibre2">America’s Assembly Line</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013), 97.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber121" id="EndnoteNumber121" class="calibre3"><span>18</span></a><span>.</span> To explain to the younger reader born after a time when these services were more common: A telephone answering service played the role of a live voicemail system. If you needed to reach a doctor after hours, for example, you would call the practice’s answering service, where a live operator would <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_276" role="doc-pagebreak" title="276"></span>answer and pass along your information to the doctor on call. It is much cheaper to have one service implement this for many clients than to have each of those clients staff their own phone lines twenty-four hours a day.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber122" id="EndnoteNumber122" class="calibre3"><span>19</span></a><span>.</span> Sam Carpenter, <i class="calibre2">Work the System: The Simple Mechanics of Making More and Working Less</i>, 3rd ed. (Austin, TX: Greenleaf Book Group Press, 2011), chapter 2. I had access to only an electronic version of this book on my Kindle, so I am unable to cite specific page numbers for quotes taken from this source.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber123" id="EndnoteNumber123" class="calibre3"><span>20</span></a><span>.</span> Carpenter, <i class="calibre2">Work the System</i>, chapter 3.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber124" id="EndnoteNumber124" class="calibre3"><span>21</span></a><span>.</span> Carpenter, <i class="calibre2">Work the System</i>, chapter 4.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber125" id="EndnoteNumber125" class="calibre3"><span>22</span></a><span>.</span> The income quote and notes on being number one of 1,500 in some categories come from the official website for <i class="calibre2">Work the System</i>: Sam Carpenter, “Synopsis—For Your Business: Breaking Loose,” July 1, 2015, <a href="http://www.workthesystem.com/book/synopsis/" class="calibre3">www.workthesystem.com/book/synopsis/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber126" id="EndnoteNumber126" class="calibre3"><span>23</span></a><span>.</span> All quotes in this paragraph are from Carpenter, <i class="calibre2">Work the System</i>, chapter 11.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber127" id="EndnoteNumber127" class="calibre3"><span>24</span></a><span>.</span> The specific version of the autoresponder reproduced here comes from this site: <a href="https://tim.blog/autoresponse/" class="calibre3">https://tim.blog/autoresponse/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber128" id="EndnoteNumber128" class="calibre3"><span>25</span></a><span>.</span> See, for example, Adam Grant, “In the Company of Givers and Takers,” <i class="calibre2">Harvard Business Review</i>, April 2013, <a href="https://hbr.org/2013/04/in-the-company-of-givers-and-takers" class="calibre3">https://hbr.org/2013/04/in-the-company-of-givers-and-takers</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes-head-a">Chapter 5: The Process Principle</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber129" id="EndnoteNumber129" class="calibre3"><span>1</span></a><span>.</span> An interesting aside for fans of David Allen’s Getting Things Done methodology: the “tickler” file, a mainstay of Allen’s modern system, comes up as a standard tool in these early twentieth-century industrial productivity discussions.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber130" id="EndnoteNumber130" class="calibre3"><span>2</span></a><span>.</span> Joseph Husband, “What a New System of Management Did for Us,” ed. John S. Runnells, <i class="calibre2">System: The Magazine of Business</i> 29, no. 4 (April 1916).</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber131" id="EndnoteNumber131" class="calibre3"><span>3</span></a><span>.</span> Andrew S. Grove, <i class="calibre2">High Output Management</i> (New York: Vintage, 2015), 33.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber132" id="EndnoteNumber132" class="calibre3"><span>4</span></a><span>.</span> Kent Beck et al., “Manifesto for Agile Software Development,” 2001, agilemanifesto.org.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber133" id="EndnoteNumber133" class="calibre3"><span>5</span></a><span>.</span> Modus Cooperandi website, <a href="https://moduscooperandi.com" class="calibre3">https://moduscooperandi.com</a>, accessed September 22, 2020.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber134" id="EndnoteNumber134" class="calibre3"><span>6</span></a><span>.</span> <i class="calibre2">Thrive</i>, the official blog of Personal Kanban, <a href="http://personalkanban.com/pk/" class="calibre3">http://personalkanban.com/pk/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber135" id="EndnoteNumber135" class="calibre3"><span>7</span></a><span>.</span> Alexie Zheglov and Gerry Kirk, “Lean Coffee or an Introduction to Personal Kanban,” Agile Tour Toronto 2012 session, YouTube video, 1:40, <a href="https://youtu.be/aOrfRhcD6ms" class="calibre3">https://youtu.be/aOrfRhcD6ms</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber136" id="EndnoteNumber136" class="calibre3"><span>8</span></a><span>.</span> Bradley Miller, “Personal Kanban Scheduling Board,” March 4, 2018, YouTube video, 7:46, <a href="https://youtu.be/tTdbcoTlljQ" class="calibre3">https://youtu.be/tTdbcoTlljQ</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_277" role="doc-pagebreak" title="277"></span><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber137" id="EndnoteNumber137" class="calibre3"><span>9</span></a><span>.</span> I long ago realized that trying to generate complex numerical grades for my problem sets—e.g., scoring a problem on a scale of 1 to 15—wasn’t worth the effort, and made it very hard to grade consistently. I’ve since shifted to a scale with three possibilities (check plus, check, or zero), which lets me and my TAs quickly and consistently assess the degree to which the student understands each concept.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber138" id="EndnoteNumber138" class="calibre3"><span>10</span></a><span>.</span> If my TAs are undergraduates, I’ll add an extra step in which we have a prescheduled thirty-minute meeting to look through the problem sets and update the grading notes together. When I use graduate TAs, however, I trust them to figure this out on their own, saving me this extra thirty minutes. When Georgetown’s campus was closed due to COVID-19, we used a software tool called Canvas to make all the paper handling virtual; students submitted digital copies of their assignments, and the TAs graded them online. The process was easily adapted to this new fully electronic setup.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber139" id="EndnoteNumber139" class="calibre3"><span>11</span></a><span>.</span> Rory Vaden, “The 30x Rule: How Great Managers Multiply Performance,” American Management Association, February 3, 2015, <a href="https://playbook.amanet.org/30x-rule-great-managers-multiply-performance/" class="calibre3">https://playbook.amanet.org/30x-rule-great-managers-multiply-performance/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes-head-a">Chapter 6: The Protocol Principle</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber140" id="EndnoteNumber140" class="calibre3"><span>1</span></a><span>.</span> When I was writing my master’s thesis at MIT in the electrical engineering and computer science department (the field Shannon created from scratch with his 1937 work), we heard about Shannon’s spectacular student efforts. In retrospect, I’m not sure if this was supposed to motivate us or demoralize us.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber141" id="EndnoteNumber141" class="calibre3"><span>2</span></a><span>.</span> For a more complete treatment of Claude Shannon, I recommend Jimmy Soni and Rob Goodman’s fascinating 2017 biography, which was the source for much of the summary that follows: <i class="calibre2">A Mind at Play: How Claude Shannon Invented the Information Age</i> (New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 2017).</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber142" id="EndnoteNumber142" class="calibre3"><span>3</span></a><span>.</span> Information theorists would traditionally use the word <i class="calibre2">code</i> instead of <i class="calibre2">protocol</i> in this instance, but for the sake of clarity in the discussion we’re having here, I’m going to use <i class="calibre2">protocol</i>—as in a set of communication rules agreed on in advance—as it sidesteps the colloquial associations people hold with respect to the word <i class="calibre2">code.</i></p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber143" id="EndnoteNumber143" class="calibre3"><span>4</span></a><span>.</span> Though he didn’t have the mathematical framework required to quantify what he was doing, Samuel Morse assigned the shortest possible encoding, a single dot, to “e,” the most common letter in written English, in his famed telegraph communication protocol, Morse code.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber144" id="EndnoteNumber144" class="calibre3"><span>5</span></a><span>.</span> Prior to Shannon, communication engineers dealt with interference on channels such as telegraph or telephone wires by trying to make the signal stronger to overcome the noise. Shannon showed the power of a <i class="calibre2">digital</i> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_278" role="doc-pagebreak" title="278"></span>approach, where you encode a single bit using multiple bits, deployed using a clever code that allows you to reconstruct the original bit even if many of those transmitted are corrupted with noise. This is how all digital communication and storage mediums now work.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber145" id="EndnoteNumber145" class="calibre3"><span>6</span></a><span>.</span> More on the investment rounds of x.ai can be found in Kyle Wiggers, “X.ai’s AI Meeting Scheduler Now Costs $8 per Month,” <i class="calibre2">VentureBeat</i>, October 10, 2018, <a href="https://venturebeat.com/2018/10/10/x-ai-introduces-calendar-view-and-new-plans-starting-at-8-per-month/" class="calibre3">https://venturebeat.com/2018/10/10/x-ai-introduces-calendar-view-and-new-plans-starting-at-8-per-month/</a>. The specific $26 million figure comes from my personal conversations with Mortensen. Interestingly, as detailed in this article, Mortensen eventually realized that having Amy communicate with natural language wasn’t actually that important. The latest version of the product offers more structured interfaces for meeting planning.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber146" id="EndnoteNumber146" class="calibre3"><span>7</span></a><span>.</span> Leslie A. Perlow, Constance Noonan Hadley, and Eunice Eun, “Stop the Meeting Madness,” <i class="calibre2">Harvard Business Review</i>, July–August 2017, <a href="https://hbr.org/2017/07/stop-the-meeting-madness" class="calibre3">https://hbr.org/2017/07/stop-the-meeting-madness</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber147" id="EndnoteNumber147" class="calibre3"><span>8</span></a><span>.</span> To elaborate on my use of part-time assistants, I do not, at the moment, have a permanent assistant. I tend instead to bring on assistants temporarily to help during particularly busy periods, such as those surrounding book launches. This would not have been possible in an age before web-based part-time remote work platforms.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber148" id="EndnoteNumber148" class="calibre3"><span>9</span></a><span>.</span> Cal Newport, “A Modest Proposal: Eliminate Email,” <i class="calibre2">Harvard Business Review</i>, February 18, 2016, <a href="https://hbr.org/2016/02/a-modest-proposal-eliminate-email" class="calibre3">https://hbr.org/2016/02/a-modest-proposal-eliminate-email</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber149" id="EndnoteNumber149" class="calibre3"><span>10</span></a><span>.</span> Jason Fried and David Heinemeier Hansson, <i class="calibre2">It Doesn’t Have to Be Crazy at Work</i> (New York: Harper Business, 2018).</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber150" id="EndnoteNumber150" class="calibre3"><span>11</span></a><span>.</span> Fried and Hansson, <i class="calibre2">Crazy at Work</i>, 56.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber151" id="EndnoteNumber151" class="calibre3"><span>12</span></a><span>.</span> Fried and Hansson, <i class="calibre2">Crazy at Work</i>, 57.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber152" id="EndnoteNumber152" class="calibre3"><span>13</span></a><span>.</span> Scott Kirsner, “I’m Joining the Open Office Hours Movement, November 24th,” Boston.com, November 20, 2009, <a href="http://archive.boston.com/business/technology/innoeco/2009/11/im_joining_the_open_office_hou.html" class="calibre3">http://archive.boston.com/business/technology/innoeco/2009/11/im_joining_the_open_office_hou.html</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber153" id="EndnoteNumber153" class="calibre3"><span>14</span></a><span>.</span> Cal Newport, <i class="calibre2">So Good They Can’t Ignore You: Why Skills Trump Passion in the Quest for Work You Love</i> (New York: Business Plus, 2012), 73.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber154" id="EndnoteNumber154" class="calibre3"><span>15</span></a><span>.</span> The original name of the company was Princeton Internet Solutions. Michael and I soon realized, however, that the resulting acronym was less than optimal.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber155" id="EndnoteNumber155" class="calibre3"><span>16</span></a><span>.</span> Tom Foster, “Tim Ferriss’s 4-Hour Reality Check,” <i class="calibre2">Inc</i>., April 2, 2013, <a href="http://www.inc.com/magazine/201304/tom-foster/tim-ferriss-four-hour-reality-check.html" class="calibre3">www.inc.com/magazine/201304/tom-foster/tim-ferriss-four-hour-reality-check.html</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber156" id="EndnoteNumber156" class="calibre3"><span>17</span></a><span>.</span> Here are the relevant histories from which the different aspects of the email story were pulled: Samuel Gibbs, “How Did Email Grow from Messages between Academics to a Global Epidemic?,” <i class="calibre2">The Guardian</i>, March 7, 2016, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_279" role="doc-pagebreak" title="279"></span><a href="http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/07/email-ray-tomlinson-history" class="calibre3">www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/07/email-ray-tomlinson-history</a>; and Ray Tomlinson, “Frequently Asked Questions,” http://openmap.bbn.com/~tomlinso/ray/firstemailframe.html.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber157" id="EndnoteNumber157" class="calibre3"><span>18</span></a><span>.</span> C. L. Max Nikias, “Why All My Emails Are the Lengths of Texts,” <i class="calibre2">Wall Street Journal</i>, September 19, 2017, <a href="https://www.wsj.com/articles/why-all-my-emails-are-the-lengths-of-texts-1505829919" class="calibre3">https://www.wsj.com/articles/why-all-my-emails-are-the-lengths-of-texts-1505829919</a>. It’s worth noting that a year after the publication of the 2017 op-ed cited here, Nikias resigned from his position as president of USC. As subsequent reporting revealed, the outward successes of his presidency had been mirrored by an erosion of trust between Nikias and the faculty at the university, leading to unhappiness. It’s probably safe to assume, however, that this ouster had nothing to do with his email habits (faculty do not have direct email access to the president at large universities), so we can still learn from his tactics for remaining productive with an overfilled inbox.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber158" id="EndnoteNumber158" class="calibre3"><span>19</span></a><span>.</span> Mike Davidson, “A Low-Fi Solution to E-Mail Overload: Sentenc.es,” MikeIndustries.com, July 17, 2007, <a href="https://mikeindustries.com/blog/archive/2007/07/fight-email-overload-with-sentences" class="calibre3">https://mikeindustries.com/blog/archive/2007/07/fight-email-overload-with-sentences</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber159" id="EndnoteNumber159" class="calibre3"><span>20</span></a><span>.</span> Michael Hicks and Jeffrey S. Foster, “Adapting Scrum to Managing a Research Group” (Department of Computer Science Technical Report #CS-TR-4966, University of Maryland, College Park, September 18, 2010), <a href="https://drum.lib.umd.edu/handle/1903/10743" class="calibre3">https://drum.lib.umd.edu/handle/1903/10743</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes-head-a">Chapter 7: The Specialization Principle</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber160" id="EndnoteNumber160" class="calibre3"><span>1</span></a><span>.</span> Edward Tenner, <i class="calibre2">Why Things Bite Back: Technology and the Revenge of Unintended Consequences</i> (New York: Vintage, 1997), 238–39.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber161" id="EndnoteNumber161" class="calibre3"><span>2</span></a><span>.</span> Tenner, <i class="calibre2">Why Things Bite Back</i>, 240.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber162" id="EndnoteNumber162" class="calibre3"><span>3</span></a><span>.</span> Peter G. Sassone, “Survey Finds Low Office Productivity Linked to Staffing Imbalances,” <i class="calibre2">National Productivity Review</i> 11, no. 2 (Spring 1992): 147–58. This study was also cited and summarized by Edward Tenner in <i class="calibre2">Why Things Bite Back</i> (cited in the preceding two notes), which is how I first came across it.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber163" id="EndnoteNumber163" class="calibre3"><span>4</span></a><span>.</span> Cal Newport, “Is Email Making Professors Stupid?,” <i class="calibre2">Chronicle of Higher Education</i>, February 12, 2019, <a href="http://www.chronicle.com/interactives/is-email-making-professors-stupid" class="calibre3">www.chronicle.com/interactives/is-email-making-professors-stupid</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber164" id="EndnoteNumber164" class="calibre3"><span>5</span></a><span>.</span> Greg McKeown, <i class="calibre2">Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less</i> (New York: Crown Business, 2014), 1–3.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber165" id="EndnoteNumber165" class="calibre3"><span>6</span></a><span>.</span> Readers of my book <i class="calibre2">Deep Work</i> might identify this phenomenon as what I called the <i class="calibre2">whiteboard effect.</i> Generally speaking, using a common screen or board to work collaboratively with a small group on a hard problem will intensify the depth of concentration you achieve compared with working <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_280" role="doc-pagebreak" title="280"></span>alone. Cal Newport, <i class="calibre2">Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World</i> (New York: Grand Central Publishing, 2016).</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber166" id="EndnoteNumber166" class="calibre3"><span>7</span></a><span>.</span> Anne Lamott, “Time Lost and Found,” <i class="calibre2">Sunset</i>, April 5, 2010, <a href="http://www.sunset.com/travel/anne-lamott-how-to-find-time" class="calibre3">www.sunset.com/travel/anne-lamott-how-to-find-time</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber167" id="EndnoteNumber167" class="calibre3"><span>8</span></a><span>.</span> Pat Flynn, “SPI 115: 9000 Unread Emails to Inbox Zero: My Executive Assistant Shares How We Did It (and How You Can Too!),” June 28, 2014, in <i class="calibre2">Smart Passive Income Podcast with Pat Flynn</i>, 35:22, <a href="http://www.smartpassiveincome.com/podcasts/email-management/" class="calibre3">www.smartpassiveincome.com/podcasts/email-management/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber168" id="EndnoteNumber168" class="calibre3"><span>9</span></a><span>.</span> Laura Vanderkam, “Can You Really Spend Just 20 Hours a Week on Core Production?,” LauraVanderkam.com, October 15, 2015, <a href="https://lauravanderkam.com/2015/10/can-you-really-spend-just-20-hours-a-week-on-core-production/" class="calibre3">https://lauravanderkam.com/2015/10/can-you-really-spend-just-20-hours-a-week-on-core-production/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber169" id="EndnoteNumber169" class="calibre3"><span>10</span></a><span>.</span> For more on Scrum sprints and the timing of this methodology’s formation, see Ken Schwaber and Jeff Sutherland, <i class="calibre2">The Scrum Guide: The Definitive Guide to Scrum: The Rules of the Game</i>, November 2017, <a href="http://www.scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v2017/2017-Scrum-Guide-US.pdf" class="calibre3">www.scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v2017/2017-Scrum-Guide-US.pdf</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber170" id="EndnoteNumber170" class="calibre3"><span>11</span></a><span>.</span> The timeline and details of Google Ventures cited come from its website: <a href="http://www.gv.com/" class="calibre3">www.gv.com/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber171" id="EndnoteNumber171" class="calibre3"><span>12</span></a><span>.</span> My summary of the sprint methodology comes from Jake Knapp, with John Zeratsky and Braden Kowitz, <i class="calibre2">Sprint: How to Solve Big Problems and Test New Ideas in Just Five Days</i> (New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 2016).</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber172" id="EndnoteNumber172" class="calibre3"><span>13</span></a><span>.</span> Bruce Janz, “Is Email Making Professors Stupid? That’s Not the Issue,” Department of Philosophy, University of Central Florida, February 12, 2019, <a href="https://faculty.cah.ucf.edu/bbjanz/is-email-making-professors-stupid-thats-not-the-issue/" class="calibre3">https://faculty.cah.ucf.edu/bbjanz/is-email-making-professors-stupid-thats-not-the-issue/</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber173" id="EndnoteNumber173" class="calibre3"><span>14</span></a><span>.</span> Laura Vanderkam recommends that individual knowledge workers start by figuring out how much time to invest in different activities, and then work backward to hit these targets, implementing a self-imposed activity budget: Laura Vanderkam, “How to Craft a Perfect, Productive 40-Hour Workweek,” <i class="calibre2">Fast Company</i>, October 13, 2015, <a href="http://www.fastcompany.com/3052051/how-to-craft-a-perfect-productive-40-hour-work-week" class="calibre3">www.fastcompany.com/3052051/how-to-craft-a-perfect-productive-40-hour-work-week</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber174" id="EndnoteNumber174" class="calibre3"><span>15</span></a><span>.</span> Linda Babcock, Maria P. Recalde, and Lise Vesterlund, “Why Women Volunteer for Tasks That Don’t Lead to Promotions,” <i class="calibre2">Harvard Business Review</i>, July 16, 2018, <a href="https://hbr.org/2018/07/why-women-volunteer-for-tasks-that-dont-lead-to-promotions" class="calibre3">https://hbr.org/2018/07/why-women-volunteer-for-tasks-that-dont-lead-to-promotions</a>.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber175" id="EndnoteNumber175" class="calibre3"><span>16</span></a><span>.</span> Around the time I was writing this chapter, Georgetown began putting into place an impressive, invisible UI–style service to help professors work on academic research more effectively. The university is appointing “research coordinators” for each of the major research areas. If a professor has any questions about the administrative infrastructure surrounding their work <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_281" role="doc-pagebreak" title="281"></span>(e.g., grant issues), they can just ask the coordinator, who will then find the right support units to get the needed information or resolve the issue.</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes-head-a">Conclusion: The Twenty-First-Century Moonshot</p>
			<p class="x13-bm-endnotes"><a href="17_Conclusion_The_Twenty.xhtml#SuperscriptNumber176" id="EndnoteNumber176" class="calibre3"><span>1</span></a><span>.</span> Neil Postman, “Five Things We Need to Know about Technological Change” (talk delivered in Denver, CO, March 28, 1998), <a href="https://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/classes/188/materials/postman.pdf" class="calibre3">https://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/classes/188/materials/<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_282" role="doc-pagebreak" title="282"></span>postman.pdf</a>.</p>
		</div>
	


  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html">Table of contents
</a></h2>
    <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="02_Also_by_Cal_Newport.xhtml">Also by Cal Newport</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="03_Title_Page.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="04_Copyright.xhtml">Copyright</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="05_Dedication.xhtml">Dedication</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="06_Contents.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="07_Introduction_The_Hype.xhtml">Introduction: The Hyperactive Hive Mind</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="08_Part_1_The_Case_Again.xhtml">Part 1: The Case Against Email</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="09_Chapter_1_Email_Reduc.xhtml">Chapter 1: Email Reduces Productivity</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="10_Chapter_2_Email_Makes.xhtml">Chapter 2: Email Makes Us Miserable</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="11_Chapter_3_Email_Has_a.xhtml">Chapter 3: Email Has a Mind of Its Own</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="12_Part_2_Principles_for.xhtml">Part 2: Principles for a World Without Email</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="13_Chapter_4_The_Attenti.xhtml">Chapter 4: The Attention Capital Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="14_Chapter_5_The_Process.xhtml">Chapter 5: The Process Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="15_Chapter_6_The_Protoco.xhtml">Chapter 6: The Protocol Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="16_Chapter_7_The_Special.xhtml">Chapter 7: The Specialization Principle</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="17_Conclusion_The_Twenty.xhtml">Conclusion: The Twenty-First-Century Moonshot</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="18_Acknowledgments.xhtml">Acknowledgments</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="19_Notes.xhtml">Notes</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="20_Index.xhtml">Index</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="21_About_the_Author.xhtml">About the Author</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="18_Acknowledgments.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
    

    <a href="../../../n6gwhr7i.html" class="calibreAHome">start
</a>

    
      <a href="20_Index.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
